Chapter X
IN THE NAME OF THE BEST WITHIN US
Dagny walked straight toward the guard who stood at the door of “Project
F.” Her steps sounded purposeful, even and open, ringing in the silence of
the path among the trees. She raised her head to a ray of moonlight, to let
him recognize her face.
“Let me in,” she said.
“No admittance,” he answered in the voice of a robot. “By order of Dr.
Ferris.”
“I am here by order of Mr. Thompson.”
“Huh? . . . I . . . I don’t know about that.”
“I do.”
“I mean, Dr. Ferris hasn’t told me . . . ma’am.”
“I am telling you.”
“But I’m not supposed to take any orders from anyone excepting Dr.
Ferris.”
“Do you wish to disobey Mr. Thompson?”
“Oh, no, ma’am! But . . . but if Dr. Ferris said to let nobody in, that
means nobody—” He added uncertainly and pleadingly, “—doesn’t it?”
“Do you know that I am Dagny Taggart and that you’ve seen my pictures
in the papers with Mr. Thompson and all the top leaders of the country?”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“Then decide whether you wish to disobey their orders.”
“Oh, no, ma’am! I don’t!”
“Then let me in.”
“But I can’t disobey Dr. Ferris, either!”
“Then choose.”
“But I can’t choose, ma’am! Who am I to choose?”
“You’ll have to.”
“Look,” he said hastily, pulling a key from his pocket and turning to the
door, “I’ll ask the chief. He—”
“No,” she said.
Some quality in the tone of her voice made him whirl back to her: she
was holding a gun pointed levelly at his heart.
“Listen carefully,” she said. “Either you let me in or I shoot you. You
may try to shoot me first, if you can. You have that choice—and no other.
Now decide.”
His mouth fell open and the key dropped from his hand.
“Get out of my way,” she said.
He shook his head frantically, pressing his back against the door. “Oh
Christ, ma’am!” he gulped in the whine of a desperate plea. “I can’t shoot at
you, seeing as you come from Mr. Thompson! And I can’t let you in against
the word of Dr. Ferris! What am I to do? I’m only a little fellow! I’m only
obeying orders! It’s not up to me!”
“It’s your life,” she said.
“If you let me ask the chief, he’ll tell me, he’ll—”
“I won’t let you ask anyone.”
“But how do I know that you really have an order from Mr. Thompson?”
“You don’t. Maybe I haven’t. Maybe I’m acting on my own—and you’ll
be punished for obeying me. Maybe I have—and you’ll be thrown in jail for
disobeying. Maybe Dr. Ferris and Mr. Thompson agree about this. Maybe
they don’t—and you have to defy one or the other. These are the things you
have to decide. There is no one to ask, no one to call, no one to tell you.
You will have to decide them yourself.”
“But I can’t decide! Why me?”
“Because it’s your body that’s barring my way.”
“But I can’t decide! I’m not supposed to decide!”
“I’ll count to three,” she said. “Then I’ll shoot.”
“Wait! Wait! I haven’t said yes or no!” he cried, cringing tighter against
the door, as if immobility of mind and body were his best protection.
“One—” she counted; she could see his eyes staring at her in terror
—“Two—” she could see that the gun held less terror for him than the
alternative she offered—“Three.”
Calmly and impersonally, she, who would have hesitated to fire at an
animal, pulled the trigger and fired straight at the heart of a man who had
wanted to exist without the responsibility of consciousness.
Her gun was equipped with a silencer; there was no sound to attract
anyone’s attention, only the thud of a body falling at her feet.
She picked up the key from the ground—then waited for a few brief
moments, as had been agreed upon.
Francisco was first to join her, coming from behind a corner of the
building, then Hank Rearden, then Ragnar Danneskjöld. There had been
four guards posted at intervals among the trees, around the building. They
were now disposed of: one was dead, three were left in the brush, bound
and gagged.
She handed the key to Francisco without a word. He unlocked the door
and went in, alone, leaving the door open to the width of an inch. The three
others waited outside, by that opening.
The hall was lighted by a single naked bulb stuck in the middle of the
ceiling. A guard stood at the foot of the stairs leading to the second floor.
“Who are you?” he cried at the sight of Francisco entering as if he owned
the place. “Nobody’s supposed to come in here tonight!”
“I did,” said Francisco.
“Why did Rusty let you in?”
“He must have had his reasons.”
“He wasn’t supposed to!”
“Somebody has changed your suppositions.” Francisco’s eyes were
taking a lightning inventory of the place. A second guard stood on the
landing at the turn of the stairs, looking down at them and listening.
“What’s your business?”
“Copper-mining.”
“Huh? I mean, who are you?”
“The name’s too long to tell you. I’ll tell it to your chief. Where is he?”
“I’m asking the questions!” But he backed a step away. “Don’t . . . don’t
you act like a big shot or I’ll—”
“Hey, Pete, he is!” cried the second guard, paralyzed by Francisco’s
manner.
The first one was struggling to ignore it; his voice grew louder with the
growth of his fear, as he snapped at Francisco, “What are you after?”
“I said I’ll tell it to your chief. Where is he?”
“I’m asking the questions!”
“I’m not answering them.”
“Oh, you’re not, are you?” snarled Pete, who had but one recourse when
in doubt: his hand jerked to the gun on his hip.
Francisco’s hand was too fast for the two men to see its motion, and his
gun was too silent. What they saw and heard next was the gun flying out of
Pete’s hand, along with a splatter of blood from his shattered fingers, and
his muffled howl of pain. He collapsed, groaning. In the instant when the
second guard grasped it, he saw that Francisco’s gun was aimed at him.
“Don’t shoot, mister!” he cried.
“Come down here with your hands up,” ordered Francisco, holding his
gun aimed with one hand and waving a signal to the crack of the door with
the other.
By the time the guard descended the stairs, Rearden was there to disarm
him, and Danneskjöld to tie his hands and feet. The sight of Dagny seemed
to frighten him more than the rest; he could not understand it: the three men
wore caps and windbreakers, and, but for their manner, could be taken for a
gang of highwaymen; the presence of a lady was inexplicable.
“Now,” said Francisco, “where is your chief?”
The guard jerked his head in the direction of the stairs. “Up there.”
“How many guards are there in the building?”
“Nine.”
“Where are they?”
“One’s on the cellar stairs. The others are all up there.”
“Where?”
“In the big laboratory. The one with the window.”
“All of them?”
“Yes.”
“What are these rooms?” He pointed at the doors leading off the hall.
“They’re labs, too. They’re locked for the night.”
“Who’s got the key?”
“Him.” He jerked his head at Pete.
Rearden and Danneskjold took the key from Pete’s pocket and hurried
soundlessly to check the rooms, while Francisco continued, “Are there any
other men in the building?”
“No.”
“Isn’t there a prisoner here?”
“Oh . . . yeah, I guess so. There must be, or they wouldn’t’ve kept us all
on duty.”
“Is he still here?”
“That, I don’t know. They’d never tell us.”
“Is Dr. Ferris here?”
“No. He left ten-fifteen minutes ago.”
“Now, that laboratory upstairs—does it open right on the stair landing?”
“Yes.”
“How many doors are there?”
“Three. It’s the one in the middle.”
“What are the other rooms?”
“There’s the small laboratory on one side and Dr. Ferris’ office on the
other.”
“Are there connecting doors between them?”
“Yes.”
Francisco was turning to his companions, when the guard said
pleadingly, “Mister, can I ask you a question?”
“Go ahead.”
“Who are you?”
He answered in the solemn tone of a drawing-room introduction,
“Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastián d’Anconia.”
He left the guard gaping at him and turned to a brief, whispered
consultation with his companions.
In a moment, it was Rearden who went up the stairs—swiftly,
soundlessly and alone.
Cages containing rats and guinea pigs were stacked against the walls of
the laboratory; they had been put there by the guards who were playing
poker on the long laboratory table in the center. Six of them were playing;
two were standing in opposite corners, watching the entrance door, guns in
hand. It was Rearden’s face that saved him from being shot on sight when
he entered: his face was too well known to them and too unexpected. He
saw eight heads staring at him with recognition and with inability to believe
what they were recognizing.
He stood at the door, his hands in the pockets of his trousers, with the
casual, confident manner of a business executive.
“Who is in charge here?” he asked in the politely abrupt voice of a man
who does not waste time.
“You . . . you’re not . . .” stammered a lanky, surly individual at the card
table.
“I’m Hank Rearden. Are you the chief?”
“Yeah! But where in blazes do you come from?”
“From New York.”
“What are you doing here?”
“Then I take it, you have not been notified.”
“Should I have . . . I mean, about what?” The swift, touchy, resentful
suspicion that his superiors had slighted his authority, was obvious in the
chief’s voice. He was a tall, emaciated man, with jerky movements, a
sallow face and the restless, unfocused eyes of a drug addict.
“About my business here.”
“You . . . you can’t have any business here,” he snapped, torn between
the fear of a bluff and the fear of having been left out of some important,
top-level decision. “Aren’t you a traitor and a deserter and a—”
“I see that you’re behind the times, my good man.”
The seven others in the room were staring at Rearden with an awed,
superstitious uncertainty. The two who held guns still held them aimed at
him in the impassive manner of automatons. He did not seem to take notice
of them.
“What is it you say is your business here?” snapped the chief.
“I am here to take charge of the prisoner whom you are to deliver to me.”
“If you came from headquarters, you’d know that I’m not supposed to
know anything about any prisoner—and that nobody is to touch him!”
“Except me.”
The chief leaped to his feet, darted to a telephone and seized the receiver.
He had not raised it halfway to his ear when he dropped it abruptly with a
gesture that sent a vibration of panic through the room: he had had time to
hear that the telephone was dead and to know that the wires were cut.
His look of accusation, as he whirled to Rearden, broke against the
faintly contemptuous reproof of Rearden’s voice: “That’s no way to guard a
building—if this is what you allowed to happen. Better let me have the
prisoner, before anything happens to him—if you don’t want me to report
you for negligence, as well as insubordination.”
The chief dropped heavily back on his chair, slumped forward across the
table and looked up at Rearden with a glance that made his emaciated face
resemble the animals that were beginning to stir in the cages.
“Who is the prisoner?” he asked.
“My good man,” said Rearden, “If your immediate superiors did not see
fit to tell you, I certainly will not.”
“They didn’t see fit to tell me about your coming here, either!” yelled the
chief, his voice confessing the helplessness of anger and broadcasting the
vibrations of impotence to his men. “How do I know you’re on the level?
With the phone out of order, who’s going to tell me? How am I to know
what to do?”
“That’s your problem, not mine.”
“I don’t believe you!” His cry was too shrill to project conviction. “I
don’t believe that the government would send you on a mission, when
you’re one of those vanishing traitors and friends of John Galt who—”
“But haven’t you heard?”
“What?”
“John Galt has made a deal with the government and has brought us all
back.”
“Oh, thank God!” cried one of the guards, the youngest.
“Shut your mouth! You’re not to have any political opinions!” snapped
the chief, and jerked back to Rearden. “Why hasn’t it been announced on
the radio?”
“Do you presume to hold opinions on when and how the government
should choose to announce its policies?”
In the long moment of silence, they could hear the rustle of the animals
clawing at the bars of their cages.
“I think I should remind you,” said Rearden, “that your job is not to
question orders, but to obey them, that you are not to know or understand
the politics of your superiors, that you are not to judge, to choose or to
doubt.”
“But I don’t know whether I’m supposed to obey you!”
“If you refuse, you’ll take the consequences.”
Crouching against the table, the chief moved his glance slowly,
appraisingly, from Rearden’s face to the two gunmen in the corners. The
gunmen steadied their aim by an almost imperceptible movement. A
nervous rustle went through the room. An animal squeaked shrilly in one of
the cages.
“I think I should also tell you,” said Rearden, his voice faintly harder,
“that I am not alone. My friends are waiting outside.”
“Where?”
“All around this room.”
“How many?”
“You’ll find out—one way or the other.”
“Say, Chief,” moaned a shaky voice from among the guards, “we don’t
want to tangle with those people, they’re—”
“Shut up!” roared the chief, leaping to his feet and brandishing his gun in
the direction of the speaker. “You’re not going to turn yellow on me, any of
you bastards!” He was screaming to ward off the knowledge that they had.
He was swaying on the edge of panic, fighting against the realization that
something somehow had disarmed his men. “There’s nothing to be scared
of!” He was screaming it to himself, struggling to recapture the safety of his
only sphere: the sphere of violence. “Nothing and nobody! I’ll show you!”
He whirled around, his hand shaking at the end of his sweeping arm, and
fired at Rearden.
Some of them saw Rearden sway, his right hand gripping his left
shoulder. Others, in the same instant, saw the gun drop out of the chief’s
hand and hit the floor in time with his scream and with the spurt of blood
from his wrist. Then all of them saw Francisco d’Anconia standing at the
door on the left, his soundless gun still aimed at the chief.
All of them were on their feet and had drawn their guns, but they lost that
first moment, not daring to fire.
“I wouldn’t, if I were you,” said Francisco.
“Jesus!” gasped one of the guards, struggling for the memory of a name
he could not capture. “That’s . . . that’s the guy who blew up all the copper
mines in the world!”
“It is,” said Rearden.
They had been backing involuntarily away from Francisco—and turned
to see that Rearden still stood at the entrance door, with a pointed gun in his
right hand and a dark stain spreading on his left shoulder.
“Shoot, you bastards!” screamed the chief to the wavering men. “What
are you waiting for? Shoot them down!” He was leaning with one arm
against the table, blood running out of the other. “I’ll report any man who
doesn’t fight! I’ll have him sentenced to death for it!”
“Drop your guns,” said Rearden.
The seven guards stood frozen for an instant, obeying neither.
“Let me out of here!” screamed the youngest, dashing for the door on the
right.
He threw the door open and sprang back: Dagny Taggart stood on the
threshold, gun in hand.
The guards were drawing slowly to the center of the room, fighting an
invisible battle in the fog of their minds, disarmed by a sense of unreality in
the presence of the legendary figures they had never expected to see, feeling
almost as if they were ordered to fire at ghosts.
“Drop your guns,” said Rearden. “You don’t know why you’re here. We
do. You don’t know who your prisoner is. We do. You don’t know why your
bosses want you to guard him. We know why we want to get him out. You
don’t know the purpose of your fight. We know the purpose of ours. If you
die, you won’t know what you’re dying for. If we do, we will.”
“Don’t . . . don’t listen to him!” snarled the chief. “Shoot! I order you to
shoot!”
One of the guards looked at the chief, dropped his gun and, raising his
arms, backed away from the group toward Rearden.
“God damn you!” yelled the chief, seized a gun with his left hand and
fired at the deserter.
In time with the fall of the man’s body, the window burst into a shower of
glass—and from the limb of a tree, as from a catapult, the tall, slender
figure of a man flew into the room, landed on its feet and fired at the first
guard in reach.
“Who are you?” screamed some terror-blinded voice.
“Ragnar Danneskjöld.”
Three sounds answered him: a long, swelling moan of panic—the clatter
of four guns dropped to the floor—and the bark of the fifth, fired by a guard
at the forehead of the chief.
By the time the four survivors of the garrison began to reassemble the
pieces of their consciousness, their figures were stretched on the floor,
bound and gagged; the fifth one was left standing, his hands tied behind his
back.
“Where is the prisoner?” Francisco asked him.
“In the cellar . . . I guess.”
“Who has the key?”
“Dr. Ferris.”
“Where are the stairs to the cellar?”
“Behind a door in Dr. Ferris’ office.”
“Lead the way.”
As they started, Francisco turned to Rearden. “Are you all right, Hank?”
“Sure.”
“Need to rest?”
“Hell, no!”
From the threshold of a door in Ferris’ office, they looked down a steep
flight of stone stairs and saw a guard on the landing below.
“Come here with your hands up!” ordered Francisco.
The guard saw the silhouette of a resolute stranger and the glint of a gun:
it was enough. He obeyed immediately; he seemed relieved to escape from
the damp stone crypt. He was left tied on the floor of the office, along with
the guard who had led them.
Then the four rescuers were free to fly down the stairs to the locked steel
door at the bottom. They had acted and moved with the precision of a
controlled discipline. Now, it was as if their inner reins had broken.
Danneskjöld had the tools to smash the lock. Francisco was first to enter
the cellar, and his arm barred Dagny’s way for the fraction of a second—for
the length of a look to make certain that the sight was bearable—then he let
her rush past him: beyond the tangle of electric wires, he had seen Galt’s
lifted head and glance of greeting.
She fell down on her knees by the side of the mattress. Galt looked up at
her, as he had looked on their first morning in the valley, his smile was like
the sound of a laughter that had never been touched by pain, his voice was
soft and low:
“We never had to take any of it seriously, did we?”
Tears running down her face, but her smile declaring a full, confident,
radiant certainty, she answered, “No, we never had to.”
Rearden and Danneskjöld were cutting his bonds. Francisco held a flask
of brandy to Galt’s lips. Galt drank, and raised himself to lean on an elbow
when his arms were free. “Give me a cigarette,” he said.
Francisco produced a package of dollar-sign cigarettes. Galt’s hand shook
a little, as he held a cigarette to the flame of a lighter, but Francisco’s hand
shook much more.
Glancing at his eyes over the flame, Galt smiled and said in the tone of
an answer to the questions Francisco was not asking, “Yes, it was pretty
bad, but bearable—and the kind of voltage they used leaves no damage.”
“I’ll find them some day, whoever they were . . .” said Francisco; the
tone of his voice, flat, dead and barely audible, said the rest.
“If you do, you’ll find that there’s nothing left of them to kill.”
Galt glanced at the faces around him; he saw the intensity of the relief in
their eyes and the violence of the anger in the grimness of their features; he
knew in what manner they were now reliving his torture.
“It’s over,” he said. “Don’t make it worse for yourself than it was for
me.”
Francisco turned his face away. “It’s only that it was you . . .” he
whispered, “you . . . if it were anyone but you . . .”
“But it had to be me, if they were to try their last, and they’ve tried,
and”—he moved his hand, sweeping the room—and the meaning of those
who had made it—into the wastelands of the past—“and that’s that.”
Francisco nodded, his face still turned away; the violent grip of his
fingers clutching Galt’s wrist for a moment was his answer.
Galt lifted himself to a sitting posture, slowly regaining control of his
muscles. He glanced up at Dagny’s face, as her arm shot forward to help
him; he saw the struggle of her smile against the tension of her resisted
tears; it was the struggle of her knowledge that nothing could matter beside
the sight of his naked body and that his body was living—against her
knowledge of what it had endured. Holding her glance, he raised his hand
and touched the collar of her white sweater with his fingertips, in
acknowledgment and in reminder of the only things that were to matter
from now on. The faint tremor of her lips, relaxing into a smile, told him
that she understood.
Danneskjöld found Galt’s shirt, slacks and the rest of his clothing, which
had been thrown on the floor in a corner of the room. “Do you think you
can walk, John?” he asked.
“Sure.”
While Francisco and Rearden were helping Galt to dress, Danneskjöld
proceeded calmly, systematically, with no visible emotion, to demolish the
torture machine into splinters.
Galt was not fully steady on his feet, but he could stand, leaning on
Francisco’s shoulder. The first few steps were hard, but by the time they
reached the door, he was able to resume the motions of walking. His one
arm encircled Francisco’s shoulders for support; his other arm held Dagny’s
shoulders, both to gain support and to give it.
They did not speak as they walked down the hill, with the darkness of the
trees closing in about them for protection, cutting off the dead glow of the
moon and the deader glow in the distance behind them, in the windows of
the State Science Institute.
Francisco’s airplane was hidden in the brush, on the edge of a meadow
beyond the next hill. There were no human habitations for miles around
them. There were no eyes to notice or to question the sudden streaks of the
airplane’s headlights shooting across the desolation of dead weeds, and the
violent burst of the motor brought to life by Danneskjöld, who took the
wheel.
With the sound of the door slamming shut behind them and the forward
thrust of the wheels under their feet, Francisco smiled for the first time.
“This is my one and only chance to give you orders,” he said, helping
Galt to stretch out in a reclining chair. “Now lie still, relax and take it easy .
. . You, too,” he added, turning to Dagny and pointing at the seat by Galt’s
side.
The wheels were running faster, as if gaining speed and purpose and
lightness, ignoring the impotent obstacles of small jolts from the ruts of the
ground. When the motion turned to a long, smooth streak, when they saw
the dark shapes of the trees sweeping down and dropping past their
windows, Galt leaned silently over and pressed his lips to Dagny’s hand: he
was leaving the outer world with the one value he had wanted to win from
it.
Francisco had produced a first-aid kit and was removing Rearden’s shirt
to bandage his wound. Galt saw the thin red trickle running from Rearden’s
shoulder down his chest.
“Thank you, Hank,” he said.
Rearden smiled. “I will repeat what you said when I thanked you, on our
first meeting: ‘If you understand that I acted for my own sake, you know
that no gratitude is required.’ ”
“I will repeat,” said Galt, “the answer you gave me: ‘That is why I thank
you.’ ”
Dagny noticed that they looked at each other as if their glance were the
handshake of a bond too firm to require any statement. Rearden saw her
watching them—and the faintest contraction of his eyes was like a smile of
sanction, as if his glance were repeating to her the message he had sent her
from the valley.
They heard the sudden sound of Danneskjöld’s voice raised cheerfully in
conversation with empty space, and they realized that he was speaking over
the plane’s radio: “Yes, safe and sound, all of us. . . . Yes, he’s unhurt, just
shaken a little, and resting. . . . No, no permanent injury. . . . Yes, we’re all
here. Hank Rearden got a flesh wound, but”—he glanced over his shoulder
—“but he’s grinning at me right now. . . . Losses? I think we lost our temper
for a few minutes back there, but we’re recovering. . . . Don’t try to beat me
to Galt’s Gulch, I’ll land first—and I’ll help Kay in the restaurant to fix
your breakfast.”
“Can any outsiders hear him?” asked Dagny.
“No,” said Francisco. “It’s a frequency they’re not equipped to get.”
“Whom is he talking to?” asked Galt.
“To about half the male population of the valley,” said Francisco, “or as
many as we had space for on every plane available. They are flying behind
us right now. Did you think any of them would stay home and leave you in
the hands of the looters? We were prepared to get you by open, armed
assault on that Institute or on the Wayne-Falkland, if necessary. But we
knew that in such case we would run the risk of their killing you when they
saw that they were beaten. That’s why we decided that the four of us would
first try it alone. Had we failed, the others would have proceeded with an
open attack. They were waiting, half a mile away. We had men posted
among the trees on the hill, who saw us get out and relayed the word to the
others. Ellis Wyatt was in charge. Incidentally, he’s flying your plane. The
reason we couldn’t get to New Hampshire as fast as Dr. Ferris, is that we
had to get our planes from distant, hidden landing places, while he had the
advantage of open airports. Which, incidentally, he won’t have much
longer.”
“No,” said Galt, “not much longer.”
“That was our only obstacle. The rest was easy. I’ll tell you the whole
story later. Anyway, the four of us were all that was necessary to beat their
garrison.”
“One of these centuries,” said Danneskjöld, turning to them for a
moment, “the brutes, private or public, who believe that they can rule their
betters by force, will learn the lesson of what happens when brute force
encounters mind and force.”
“They’ve learned it,” said Galt. “Isn’t that the particular lesson you have
been teaching them for twelve years?”
“I? Yes. But the semester is over. Tonight was the last act of violence that
I’ll ever have to perform. It was my reward for the twelve years. My men
have now started to build their homes in the valley. My ship is hidden
where no one will find her, until I’m able to sell her for a much more
civilized use. She’ll be converted into a transatlantic passenger liner—an
excellent one, even if of modest size. As for me, I will start getting ready to
give a different course of lessons. I think I’ll have to brush up on the works
of our teacher’s first teacher.”
Rearden chuckled. “I’d like to be present at your first lecture on
philosophy in a university classroom,” he said. “I’d like to see how your
students will be able to keep their mind on the subject and how you’ll
answer the sort of irrelevant questions I won’t blame them for wanting to
ask you.”
“I will tell them that they’ll find the answers in the subject.”
There were not many lights on the earth below. The countryside was an
empty black sheet, with a few occasional flickers in the windows of some
government structures, and the trembling glow of candles in the windows of
thriftless homes. Most of the rural population had long since been reduced
to the life of those ages when artificial light was an exorbitant luxury, and a
sunset put an end to human activity. The towns were like scattered puddles,
left behind by a receding tide, still holding some precious drops of
electricity, but drying out in a desert of rations, quotas, controls and power-
conservation rules.
But when the place that had once been the source of the tide—New York
City—rose in the distance before them, it was still extending its lights to the
sky, still defying the primordial darkness, almost as if, in an ultimate effort,
in a final appeal for help, it were now stretching its arms to the plane that
was crossing its sky. Involuntarily, they sat up, as if at respectful attention at
the death bed of what had been greatness.
Looking down, they could see the last convulsions: the lights of the cars
were darting through the streets, like animals trapped in a maze, frantically
seeking an exit, the bridges were jammed with cars, the approaches to the
bridges were veins of massed headlights, glittering bottlenecks stopping all
motion, and the desperate screaming of sirens reached faintly to the height
of the plane. The news of the continent’s severed artery had now engulfed
the city, men were deserting their posts, trying, in panic, to abandon New
York, seeking escape where all roads were cut off and escape was no longer
possible.
The plane was above the peaks of the skyscrapers when suddenly, with
the abruptness of a shudder, as if the ground had parted to engulf it, the city
disappeared from the face of the earth. It took them a moment to realize that
the panic had reached the power stations—and that the lights of New York
had gone out.
Dagny gasped. “Don’t look down!” Galt ordered sharply.
She raised her eyes to his face. His face had that look of austerity with
which she had always seen him meet facts.
She remembered the story Francisco had told her: “He had quit the
Twentieth Century. He was living in a garret in a slum neighborhood. He
stepped to the window and pointed at the skyscrapers of the city. He said
that we had to extinguish the lights of the world, and when we would see
the lights of New York go out, we would know that our job was done.”
She thought of it when she saw the three of them—John Galt, Francisco
d’Anconia, Ragnar Danneskjöld—look silently at one another for a
moment.
She glanced at Rearden; he was not looking down, he was looking ahead,
as she had seen him look at an untouched countryside: with a glance
appraising the possibilities of action.
When she looked at the darkness ahead, another memory rose in her
mind—the moment when, circling above the Afton airport, she had seen the
silver body of a plane rise like a phoenix from the darkness of the earth. She
knew that now, at this hour, their plane was carrying all that was left of New
York City.
She looked ahead. The earth would be as empty as the space where their
propeller was cutting an unobstructed path—as empty and as free. She
knew what Nat Taggart had felt at his start and why now, for the first time,
she was following him in full loyalty: the confident sense of facing a void
and of knowing that one has a continent to build.
She felt the whole struggle of her past rising before her and dropping
away, leaving her here, on the height of this moment. She smiled—and the
words in her mind, appraising and sealing the past, were the words of
courage, pride and dedication, which most men had never understood, the
words of a businessman’s language: “Price no object.”
She did not gasp and she felt no tremor when, in the darkness below, she
saw a small string of lighted dots struggling slowly westward through the
void, with the long, bright dash of a headlight groping to protect the safety
of its way; she felt nothing, even though it was a train and she knew that it
had no destination but the void.
She turned to Galt. He was watching her face, as if he had been following
her thoughts. She saw the reflection of her smile in his. “It’s the end,” she
said. “It’s the beginning,” he answered.
Then they lay still, leaning back in their chairs, silently looking at each
other. Then their persons filled each other’s awareness, as the sum and
meaning of the future—but the sum included the knowledge of all that had
had to be earned, before the person of another being could come to embody
the value of one’s existence.
New York was far behind them, when they heard Danneskjöld answer a
call from the radio: “Yes, he’s awake. I don’t think he’ll sleep tonight. . . .
Yes, I think he can.” He turned to glance over his shoulder. “John, Dr.
Akston would like to speak to you.”
“What? Is he on one of those planes behind us?”
“Certainly.”
Galt leaped forward to seize the microphone. “Hello, Dr. Akston,” he
said; the quiet, low tone of his voice was the audible image of a smile
transmitted through space.
“Hello, John.” The too-conscious steadiness of Hugh Akston’s voice
confessed at what cost he had waited to learn whether he would ever
pronounce these two words again. “I just wanted to hear your voice . . . just
to know that you’re all right.”
Galt chuckled and—in the tone of a student proudly presenting a
completed task of homework as proof of a lesson well learned—he
answered, “Of course I am all right, Professor. I had to be. A is A.”
The locomotive of the eastbound Comet broke down in the middle of a
desert in Arizona. It stopped abruptly, for no visible reason, like a man who
had not permitted himself to know that he was bearing too much: some
overstrained connection snapped for good.
When Eddie Willers called for the conductor, he waited a long time
before the man came in, and he sensed the answer to his question by the
look of resignation on the man’s face.
“The engineer is trying to find out what’s wrong, Mr. Willers,” he
answered softly, in a tone implying that it was his duty to hope, but that he
had held no hope for years.
“He doesn’t know?”
“He’s working on it.” The conductor waited for a polite half-minute and
turned to go, but stopped to volunteer an explanation, as if some dim,
rational habit told him that any attempt to explain made any unadmitted
terror easier to bear. “Those Diesels of ours aren’t fit to be sent out on the
road, Mr. Willers. They weren’t worth repairing long ago.”
“I know,” said Eddie Willers quietly.
The conductor sensed that his explanation was worse than none: it led to
questions that men did not ask these days. He shook his head and went out.
Eddie Willers sat looking at the empty darkness beyond the window. This
was the first eastbound Comet out of San Francisco in many days: she was
the child of his tortured effort to re-establish transcontinental service. He
could not tell what the past few days had cost him or what he had done to
save the San Francisco terminal from the blind chaos of a civil war that men
were fighting with no concept of their goals; there was no way to remember
the deals he had made on the basis of the range of every shifting moment.
He knew only that he had obtained immunity for the terminal from the
leaders of three different warring factions; that he had found a man for the
post of terminal manager who did not seem to have given up altogether; that
he had started one more Taggart Comet on her eastward run, with the best
Diesel engine and the best crew available; and that he had boarded her for
his return journey to New York, with no knowledge of how long his
achievement would last.
He had never worked so hard; he had done his job as conscientiously
well as he had always done any assignment; but it was as if he had worked
in a vacuum, as if his energy had found no transmitters and had run into the
sands of . . . of some such desert as the one beyond the window of the
Comet. He shuddered: he felt a moment’s kinship with the stalled engine of
the train.
After a while, he summoned the conductor once more. “How is it
going?” he asked.
The conductor shrugged and shook his head.
“Send the fireman to a track phone. Have him tell the Division
Headquarters to send us the best mechanic available.”
“Yes, sir.”
There was nothing to see beyond the windows; turning off the light,
Eddie Willers could distinguish a gray spread dotted by the black spots of
cacti, with no start to it and no end. He wondered how men had ever
ventured to cross it, and at what price, in the days when there were no
trains. He jerked his head away and snapped on the light.
It was only the fact that the Comet was in exile, he thought, that gave him
this sense of pressing anxiety. She was stalled on an alien rail—on the
borrowed track of the Atlantic Southern that ran through Arizona, the track
they were using without payment. He had to get her out of here, he thought;
he would not feel like this once they returned to their own rail. But the
junction suddenly seemed an insurmountable distance away: on the shore of
the Mississippi, at the Taggart Bridge.
No, he thought, that was not all. He had to admit to himself what images
were nagging him with a sense of uneasiness he could neither grasp nor
dispel; they were too meaningless to define and too inexplicable to dismiss.
One was the image of a way station they had passed without stopping, more
than two hours ago: he had noticed the empty platform and the brightly
lighted windows of the small station building; the lights came from empty
rooms; he had seen no single human figure, neither in the building nor on
the tracks outside. The other image was of the next way station they had
passed: its platform was jammed with an agitated mob. Now they were far
beyond the reach of the light or sound of any station.
He had to get the Comet out of here, he thought. He wondered why he
felt it with such urgency and why it had seemed so crucially important to re-
establish the Comet’s run. A mere handful of passengers was rattling in her
empty cars; men had no place to go and no goals to reach. It was not for
their sake that he had struggled; he could not say for whose. Two phrases
stood as the answer in his mind, driving him with the vagueness of a prayer
and the scalding force of an absolute. One was: From Ocean to Ocean,
forever—the other was: Don’t let it go! . . .
The conductor returned an hour later, with the fireman, whose face
looked oddly grim.
“Mr. Willers,” said the fireman slowly, “Division Headquarters does not
answer.”
Eddie Willers sat up, his mind refusing to believe it, yet knowing
suddenly that for some inexplicable reason this was what he had expected.
“It’s impossible!” he said, his voice low; the fireman was looking at him,
not moving. “The track phone must have been out of order.”
“No, Mr. Willers. It was not out of order. The line was alive all right. The
Division Headquarters wasn’t. I mean, there was no one there to answer, or
else no one who cared to.”
“But you know that that’s impossible!”
The fireman shrugged; men did not consider any disaster impossible
these days.
Eddie Willers leaped to his feet. “Go down the length of the train,” he
ordered the conductor. “Knock on all the doors—the occupied ones, that is
—and see whether there’s an electrical engineer aboard.”
“Yes, sir.”
Eddie knew that they felt, as he felt it, that they would find no such man;
not among the lethargic, extinguished faces of the passengers they had seen.
“Come on,” he ordered, turning to the fireman.
They climbed together aboard the locomotive. The gray-haired engineer
was sitting in his chair, staring out at the cacti. The engine’s headlight had
stayed on and it stretched out into the night, motionless and straight,
reaching nothing but the dissolving blur of crossties.
“Let’s try to find what’s wrong,” said Eddie, removing his coat, his voice
half-order, half-plea. “Let’s try some more.”
“Yes, sir,” said the engineer, without resentment or hope.
The engineer had exhausted his meager store of knowledge; he had
checked every source of trouble he could think of. He went crawling over
and under the machinery, unscrewing its parts and screwing them back
again, taking out pieces and replacing them, dismembering the motors at
random, like a child taking a clock apart, but without the child’s conviction
that knowledge is possible.
The fireman kept leaning out of the cab’s window, glancing at the black
stillness and shivering, as if from the night air that was growing colder.
“Don’t worry,” said Eddie Willers, assuming a tone of confidence.
“We’ve got to do our best, but if we fail, they’ll send us help sooner or later.
They don’t abandon trains in the middle of nowhere.”
“They didn’t used to,” said the fireman.
Once in a while, the engineer raised his grease-smeared face to look at
the grease-smeared face and shirt of Eddie Willers. “What’s the use, Mr.
Willers?” he asked.
“We can’t let it go!” Eddie answered fiercely; he knew dimly that what
he meant was more than the Comet . . . and more than the railroad.
Moving from the cab through the three motor units and back to the cab
again, his hands bleeding, his shirt sticking to his back, Eddie Willers was
struggling to remember everything he had ever known about engines,
anything he had learned in college, and earlier: anything he had picked up
in those days when the station agents at Rockdale Station used to chase him
off the rungs of their lumbering switch engines. The pieces connected to
nothing; his brain seemed jammed and tight; he knew that motors were not
his profession, he knew that he did not know and that it was now a matter of
life or death for him to discover the knowledge. He was looking at the
cylinders, the blades, the wires, the control panels still winking with lights.
He was struggling not to allow into his mind the thought that was pressing
against its periphery: What were the chances and how long would it take—
according to the mathematical theory of probability—for primitive men,
working by rule-of-thumb, to hit the right combination of parts and re-
create the motor of this engine?
“What’s the use, Mr Willers?” moaned the engineer.
“We can’t let it go!” he cried.
He did not know how many hours had passed when he heard the fireman
shout suddenly, “Mr. Willers! Look!”
The fireman was leaning out the window, pointing into the darkness
behind them.
Eddie Willers looked. An odd little light was swinging jerkily far in the
distance; it seemed to be advancing at an imperceptible rate; it did not look
like any sort of light he could identify.
After a while, it seemed to him that he distinguished some large black
shapes advancing slowly; they were moving in a line parallel with the track;
the spot of light hung low over the ground, swinging; he strained his ears,
but heard nothing.
Then he caught a feeble, muffled beat that sounded like the hoofs of
horses. The two men beside him were watching the black shapes with a
look of growing terror, as if some supernatural apparition were advancing
upon them out of the desert night. In the moment when they chuckled
suddenly, joyously, recognizing the shapes, it was Eddie’s face that froze
into a look of terror at the sight of a ghost more frightening than any they
could have expected: it was a train of covered wagons.
The swinging lantern jerked to a stop by the side of the engine. “Hey,
bud, can I give you a lift?” called a man who seemed to be the leader; he
was chuckling. “Stuck, aren’t you?”
The passengers of the Comet were peering out the windows; some were
descending the steps and approaching. Women’s faces peeked from the
wagons, from among the piles of household goods; a baby wailed
somewhere at the rear of the caravan.
“Are you crazy?” asked Eddie Willers.
“No, I mean it, brother. We got plenty of room. We’ll give you folks a lift
—for a price—if you want to get out of here.” He was a lanky, nervous
man, with loose gestures and an insolent voice, who looked like a side-
show barker.
“This is the Taggart Comet,” said Eddie Willers, choking.
“The Comet, eh? Looks more like a dead caterpillar to me. What’s the
matter, brother? You’re not going anywhere—and you can’t get there any
more, even if you tried.”
“What do you mean?”
“You don’t think you’re going to New York, do you?”
“We are going to New York.”
“Then . . . then you haven’t heard?”
“What?”
“Say, when was the last time you spoke to any of your stations?”
“I don’t know! . . . Heard what?”
“That your Taggart Bridge is gone. Gone. Blasted to bits. Sound-ray
explosion or something. Nobody knows exactly. Only there ain’t any bridge
any more to cross the Mississippi. There ain’t any New York any more—
leastways, not for folks like you and me to reach.”
Eddie Willers did not know what happened next; he had fallen back
against the side of the engineer’s chair, staring at the open door of the motor
unit; he did not know how long he stayed there, but when, at last, he turned
his head, he saw that he was alone. The engineer and the fireman had left
the cab. There was a scramble of voices outside, screams, sobs, shouted
questions and the sound of the side-show barker’s laughter.
Eddie pulled himself to the window of the cab: the Comet’s passengers
and crew were crowding around the leader of the caravan and his semi-
ragged companions; he was waving his loose arms in gestures of command.
Some of the better-dressed ladies from the Comet—whose husbands had
apparently been first to make a deal—were climbing aboard the covered
wagons, sobbing and clutching their delicate make-up cases.
“Step right up, folks, step right up!” the barker was yelling cheerfully.
“We’ll make room for everybody! A bit crowded, but moving—better than
being left here for coyote fodder! The day of the iron horse is past! All we
got is plain, old-fashioned horse! Slow, but sure!”
Eddie Willers climbed halfway down the ladder on the side of the engine,
to see the crowd and to be heard. He waved one arm, hanging on to the
rungs with the other. “You’re not going, are you?” he cried to his
passengers. “You’re not abandoning the Comet?”
They drew a little away from him, as if they did not want to look at him
or answer. They did not want to hear questions their minds were incapable
of weighing. He saw the blind faces of panic.
“What’s the matter with the grease-monkey?” asked the barker, pointing
at Eddie.
“Mr. Willers,” said the conductor softly, “it’s no use . . .”
“Don’t abandon the Comet!” cried Eddie Willers. “Don’t let it go! Oh
God, don’t let it go!”
“Are you crazy?” cried the barker. “You’ve no idea what’s going on at
your railroad stations and headquarters! They’re running around like a pack
of chickens with their heads cut off! I don’t think there’s going to be a
railroad left in business this side of the Mississippi, by tomorrow morning!”
“Better come along, Mr. Willers,” said the conductor.
“No!” cried Eddie, clutching the metal rung as if he wanted his hand to
grow fast to it.
The barker shrugged. “Well, it’s your funeral!”
“Which way are you going?” asked the engineer, not looking at Eddie.
“Just going, brother! Just looking for some place to stop . . . somewhere.
We’re from Imperial Valley, California. The ‘People’s Party’ crowd grabbed
the crops and any food we had in the cellars. Hoarding, they called it. So we
just picked up and went. Got to travel by night, on account of the
Washington crowd. . . . We’re just looking for some place to live. . . . You’re
welcome to come along, buddy, if you’ve got no home—or else we can
drop you off closer to some town or another.”
The men of that caravan—thought Eddie indifferently—looked too
mean-minded to become the founders of a secret, free settlement, and not
mean-minded enough to become a gang of raiders; they had no more
destination to find than the motionless beam of the headlight; and, like that
beam, they would dissolve somewhere in the empty stretches of the country.
He stayed on the ladder, looking up at the beam. He did not watch while
the last men ever to ride the Taggart Comet were transferred to the covered
wagons.
The conductor went last. “Mr. Willers!” he called desperately. “Come
along!”
“No,” said Eddie.
The side-show barker waved his arm in an upward sweep at Eddie’s
figure on the side of the engine above their heads. “I hope you know what
you’re doing!” he cried, his voice half-threat, half-plea. “Maybe somebody
will come this way to pick you up—next week or next month! Maybe!
Who’s going to, these days?”
“Get away from here,” said Eddie Willers.
He climbed back into the cab—when the wagons jerked forward and
went swaying and creaking off into the night. He sat in the engineer’s chair
of a motionless engine, his forehead pressed to the useless throttle. He felt
like the captain of an ocean liner in distress, who preferred to go down with
his ship rather than be saved by the canoe of savages taunting him with the
superiority of their craft.
Then, suddenly, he felt the blinding surge of a desperate, righteous anger.
He leaped to his feet, seizing the throttle. He had to start this train; in the
name of some victory that he could not name, he had to start the engine
moving.
Past the stage of thinking, calculation or fear, moved by some righteous
defiance, he was pulling levers at random, he was jerking the throttle back
and forth, he was stepping on the dead man’s pedal, which was dead, he
was groping to distinguish the form of some vision that seemed both distant
and close, knowing only that his desperate battle was fed by that vision and
was fought for its sake.
Don’t let it go! his mind was crying—while he was seeing the streets of
New York—Don’t let it go!—while he was seeing the lights of railroad
signals—Don’t let it go—while he was seeing the smoke rising proudly
from factory chimneys, while he was struggling to cut through the smoke
and reach the vision at the root of these visions.
He was pulling at coils of wire, he was linking them and tearing them
apart—while the sudden sense of sunrays and pine trees kept pulling at the
corners of his mind. Dagny!—he heard himself crying soundlessly—Dagny,
in the name of the best within us! . . . He was jerking at futile levers and at a
throttle that had nothing to move. . . . Dagny!—he was crying to a twelve-
year-old girl in a sunlit clearing of the woods—in the name of the best
within us, I must now start this train! . . . Dagny, that is what it was . . . and
you knew it, then, but I didn’t . . . you knew it when you turned to look at
the rails. . . . I said, “not business or earning a living” . . . but, Dagny,
business and earning a living and that in man which makes it possible—that
is the best within us, that was the thing to defend . . . in the name of saving
it, Dagny, I must now start this train . . .
When he found that he had collapsed on the floor of the cab and knew
that there was nothing he could do here any longer, he rose and he climbed
down the ladder, thinking dimly of the engine’s wheels, even though he
knew that the engineer had checked them. He felt the crunch of the desert
dust under his feet when he let himself drop to the ground. He stood still
and, in the enormous silence, he heard the rustle of tumbleweeds stirring in
the darkness, like the chuckle of an invisible army made free to move when
the Comet was not. He heard a sharper rustle close by—and he saw the
small gray shape of a rabbit rise on its haunches to sniff at the steps of a car
of the Taggart Comet. With a jolt of murderous fury, he lunged in the
direction of the rabbit, as if he could defeat the advance of the enemy in the
person of that tiny gray form. The rabbit darted off into the darkness—but
he knew that the advance was not to be defeated.
He stepped to the front of the engine and looked up at the letters TT.
Then he collapsed across the rail and lay sobbing at the foot of the engine,
with the beam of a motionless headlight above him going off into a limitless
night.
The music of Richard Halley’s Fifth Concerto streamed from his
keyboard, past the glass of the window, and spread through the air, over the
lights of the valley. It was a symphony of triumph. The notes flowed up,
they spoke of rising and they were the rising itself, they were the essence
and the form of upward motion, they seemed to embody every human act
and thought that had ascent as its motive. It was a sunburst of sound,
breaking out of hiding and spreading open. It had the freedom of release
and the tension of purpose. It swept space clean and left nothing but the joy
of an unobstructed effort. Only a faint echo within the sounds spoke of that
from which the music had escaped, but spoke in laughing astonishment at
the discovery that there was no ugliness or pain, and there never had had to
be. It was the song of an immense deliverance.
The lights of the valley fell in glowing patches on the snow still covering
the ground. There were shelves of snow on the granite ledges and on the
heavy limbs of the pines. But the naked branches of the birch trees had a
faintly upward thrust, as if in confident promise of the coming leaves of
spring.
The rectangle of light on the side of a mountain was the window of
Mulligan’s study. Midas Mulligan sat at his desk, with a map and a column
of figures before him. He was listing the assets of his bank and working on
a plan of projected investments. He was noting down the locations he was
choosing: “New York—Cleveland—Chicago . . . New York—Philadelphia .
. . New York . . . New York . . . New York . . .”
The rectangle of light at the bottom of the valley was the window of
Danneskjöld’s home. Kay Ludlow sat before a mirror, thoughtfully studying
the shades of film make-up, spread open in a battered case. Ragnar
Danneskjöld lay stretched on a couch, reading a volume of the works of
Aristotle: “ . . . for these truths hold good for everything that is, and not for
some special genus apart from others. And all men use them, because they
are true of being qua being. . . . For a principle which every one must have
who understands anything that is, is not a hypothesis. . . . Evidently then
such a principle is the most certain of all; which principle this is, let us
proceed to say. It is, that the same attribute cannot at the same time belong
and not belong to the same subject in the same respect. . . .”
The rectangle of light in the acres of a farm was the window of the
library of Judge Narragansett. He sat at a table, and the light of his lamp fell
on the copy of an ancient document. He had marked and crossed out the
contradictions in its statements that had once been the cause of its
destruction. He was now adding a new clause to its pages: “Congress shall
make no law abridging the freedom of production and trade . . .”
The rectangle of light in the midst of a forest was the window of the
cabin of Francisco d’Anconia. Francisco lay stretched on the floor, by the
dancing tongues of a fire, bent over sheets of paper, completing the drawing
of his smelter. Hank Rearden and Ellis Wyatt sat by the fireplace. “John will
design the new locomotives,” Rearden was saying, “and Dagny will run the
first railroad between New York and Philadelphia. She—” And, suddenly,
on hearing the next sentence, Francisco threw his head up and burst out
laughing, a laughter of greeting, triumph and release. They could not hear
the music of Halley’s Fifth Concerto now flowing somewhere high above
the roof, but Francisco’s laughter matched its sounds. Contained in the
sentence he had heard, Francisco was seeing the sunlight of spring on the
open lawns of homes across the country, he was seeing the sparkle of
motors, he was seeing the glow of the steel in the rising frames of new
skyscrapers, he was seeing the eyes of youth looking at the future with no
uncertainty or fear.
The sentence Rearden had uttered was: “She will probably try to take the
shirt off my back with the freight rates she’s going to charge, but—I’ll be
able to meet them.”
The faint glitter of light weaving slowly through space, on the highest
accessible ledge of a mountain, was the starlight on the strands of Galt’s
hair. He stood looking, not at the valley below, but at the darkness of the
world beyond its walls. Dagny’s hand rested on his shoulder, and the wind
blew her hair to blend with his. She knew why he had wanted to walk
through the mountains tonight and what he had stopped to consider. She
knew what words were his to speak and that she would be first to hear
them.
They could not see the world beyond the mountains, there was only a
void of darkness and rock, but the darkness was hiding the ruins of a
continent: the roofless homes, the rusting tractors, the lightless streets, the
abandoned rail. But far in the distance, on the edge of the earth, a small
flame was waving in the wind, the defiantly stubborn flame of Wyatt’s
Torch, twisting, being torn and regaining its hold, not to be uprooted or
extinguished. It seemed to be calling and waiting for the words John Galt
was now to pronounce.
“The road is cleared,” said Galt. “We are going back to the world.”
He raised his hand and over the desolate earth he traced in space the sign
of the dollar.
OceanofPDF.com
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
“My personal life,” says Ayn Rand, “is a postscript to my novels; it consists
of the sentence: ‘And I mean it.’ I have always lived by the philosophy I
present in my books—and it has worked for me, as it works for my
characters. The concretes differ, the abstractions are the same.
“I decided to be a writer at the age of nine, and everything I have done
was integrated to that purpose. I am an American by choice and conviction.
I was born in Europe, but I came to America because this was the country
based on my moral premises and the only country where one could be fully
free to write. I came here alone, after graduating from a European college. I
had a difficult struggle, earning my living at odd jobs, until I could make a
financial success of my writing. No one helped me, nor did I think at any
time that it was anyone’s duty to help me.
“In college, I had taken history as my major subject, and philosophy as
my special interest; the first—in order to have a factual knowledge of men’s
past, for my future writing; the second—in order to achieve an objective
definition of my values. I found that the first could be learned, but the
second had to be done by me.
“I have held the same philosophy I now hold, for as far back as I can
remember. I have learned a great deal through the years and expanded my
knowledge of details, of specific issues, of definitions, of applications—and
I intend to continue expanding it—but I have never had to change any of
my fundamentals. My philosophy, in essence, is the concept of man as a
heroic being, with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with
productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only
absolute.
“The only philosophical debt I can acknowledge is to Aristotle. I most
emphatically disagree with a great many parts of his philosophy—but his
definition of the laws of logic and of the means of human knowledge is so
great an achievement that his errors are irrelevant by comparison. You will
find my tribute to him in the titles of the three parts of ATLAS
SHRUGGED.
“My other acknowledgment is on the dedication page of this novel. I
knew what values of character I wanted to find in a man. I met such a man
—and we have been married for twenty-eight years. His name is Frank
O’Connor.
“To all the readers who discovered The Fountainhead and asked me
many questions about the wider application of its ideas, I want to say that I
am answering these questions in the present novel and that The
Fountainhead was only an overture to ATLAS SHRUGGED.
“I trust that no one will tell me that men such as I write about don’t exist.
That this book has been written—and published—is my proof that they do.”
A.R.
1957
OceanofPDF.com
READER’S GUIDE TO THE WRITINGS AND
PHILOSOPHY OF AYN RAND
About Ayn Rand
The Essentials of Objectivism
Writings of Ayn Rand
Books about Ayn Rand and Objectivism
About the Ayn Rand Institute
OceanofPDF.com
ABOUT Ayn Rand
Ayn Rand was born in St. Petersburg, Russia, on February 2, 1905. At
age six, she taught herself to read and two years later discovered her first
fictional hero in a French magazine for children, thus capturing the heroic
vision which sustained her throughout her life. At the age of nine, she
decided to make fiction-writing her career. Thoroughly opposed to the
mysticism and collectivism of Russian culture, she thought of herself as a
European writer, especially after encountering authors such as Walter Scott
and—in 1918—Victor Hugo, the writer she most admired.
During her high school years, she was eyewitness to both the Kerensky
Revolution, 
which 
she 
supported, 
and—in 
1917—the 
Bolshevik
Revolution, which she denounced from the outset. In order to escape the
fighting, her family went to the Crimea, where she finished high school.
The final Communist victory brought the confiscation of her father’s
pharmacy and periods of near-starvation. When introduced to American
history in her last year of high school, she immediately took America as her
model of what a nation of free men could be.
When her family returned from the Crimea, she entered the University of
Petrograd to study philosophy and history. Graduating in 1924, she
experienced the disintegration of free inquiry and the take-over of the
university by communist thugs. Amidst the increasingly gray life, her one
great pleasure was Western films and plays. Long a movie fan, she entered
the State Institute for Cinema Arts in 1924 to study screen-writing.
In late 1925, she obtained permission to leave the USSR for a visit to
relatives in the United States. Although she told Soviet authorities that her
visit would be short, she was determined never to return to Russia. Arriving
in New York City in February 1926, she spent six months with her relatives
in Chicago, obtained extensions to her visa, and then left for Hollywood to
pursue a career as a screenwriter.
On her second day in Hollywood, Cecil B. DeMille saw her standing at
the gate of his studio, offered her a ride to the set of his movie The King of
Kings, and gave her a job, first as an extra, then as a script reader. During
the next week at the studio she met an actor, Frank O’Connor, whom she
married in 1929; they were married until his death fifty years later.
After struggling for several years at various non-writing jobs, including
one in the wardrobe department at RKO, she sold her first screenplay, “Red
Pawn,” to Universal Studios in 1932 and saw her first stage play, Night of
January 16th, produced in Hollywood and then on Broadway. Her first
novel, We the Living, was completed in 1933 but was rejected by publishers
for years, until Macmillan in the United States and Cassell in England
published the book in 1936. The most autobiographical of her novels—it
was based on her years under Soviet tyranny—We the Living was not well
received by American intellectuals and reviewers. Ayn Rand was up against
the pro-communism dominating the culture during “the Red Decade.”
She began writing The Fountainhead in 1935. In the character of the
architect Howard Roark, she presented for the first time the kind of hero
whose depiction was the chief goal of her writing: the ideal man, man as
“he could be and ought to be.” The Fountainhead was rejected by twelve
publishers but finally accepted by Bobbs-Merrill. When published in 1943
it made history by becoming a best seller through word-of-mouth two years
later, and gained for its author lasting recognition as a champion of
individualism.
Ayn Rand returned to Hollywood in late 1943 to write the screenplay for
The Fountainhead, but war-time restrictions delayed production until 1948.
Working part time as a screenwriter for producer Hal Wallis, she began her
major novel, Atlas Shrugged, in 1946. In 1951, she moved back to New
York City and devoted full time to the completion of Atlas Shrugged.
Published in 1957, Atlas Shrugged was her greatest achievement and last
work of fiction. In this novel, she dramatized her unique philosophy in an
intellectual mystery story that integrated ethics, metaphysics, epistemology,
politics, economics, and sex. Although she considered herself primarily a
fiction writer, she realized that in order to create heroic fictional characters,
she had to identify the philosophic principles which make such individuals
possible. She needed to formulate “a philosophy for living on earth.”
Thereafter, Ayn Rand wrote and lectured on her philosophy—Objectivism.
She published and edited her own periodicals from 1962 to 1976, her essays
providing much of the material for nine books on Objectivism and its
application to the culture. Ayn Rand died on March 6, 1982, in her New
York City apartment.
Every book by Ayn Rand published in her lifetime is still in print, and
hundreds of thousands of copies are sold each year, so far totalling more
than twenty million. Several new volumes have been published
posthumously. Her vision of man and her philosophy for living on earth
have changed the lives of thousands of readers and launched a philosophic
movement with a growing impact on American culture.
OceanofPDF.com
THE ESSENTIALS OF OBJECTIVISM
My philosophy, in essence, is the concept of man as a heroic being, with his own happiness
as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and
reason as his only absolute.
—Ayn Rand
Ayn Rand named her philosophy “Objectivism” and described it as a
philosophy for living on earth. Objectivism is an integrated system of
thought that defines the abstract principles by which a man must think and
act if he is to live the life proper to man. Ayn Rand first portrayed her
philosophy in the form of the heroes of her best-selling novels, The
Fountainhead (1943) and Atlas Shrugged (1957). She later expressed her
philosophy in nonfiction form.
Ayn Rand was once asked if she could present the essence of Objectivism
while standing on one foot. Her answer was:
1. Metaphysics: Objective Reality
2. Epistemology: Reason
3. Ethics: Self-interest
4. Politics: Capitalism
She then translated those terms into familiar language:
1. “Nature, to be commanded, must be obeyed.”
2. “You can’t eat your cake and have it too.”
3. “Man is an end in himself.”
4. “Give me liberty or give me death.”
The basic principles of Objectivism can be summarized as follows:
1. Metaphysics: “Reality, the external world, exists independent of
man’s consciousness, independent of any observer’s knowledge,
beliefs, feelings, desires or fears. This means that A is A, that facts
are facts, that things are what they are—and that the task of man’s
consciousness is to perceive reality, not to create or invent it.” Thus
Objectivism rejects any belief in the supernatural—and any claim
that individuals or groups create their own reality.
2. Epistemology: “Man’s reason is fully competent to know the facts of
reality. Reason, the conceptual faculty, is the faculty that identifies
and integrates the material provided by man’s senses. Reason is
man’s only means of acquiring knowledge.” Thus Objectivism
rejects mysticism (any acceptance of faith or feeling as a means of
knowledge), and it rejects skepticism (the claim that certainty or
knowledge is impossible).
3. Human Nature: Man is a rational being. Reason, as man’s only
means of knowledge, is his basic means of survival. But the exercise
of reason depends on each individual’s choice. “Man is a being of
volitional consciousness.” “That which you call your soul or spirit is
your consciousness, and that which you call ‘free will’ is your
mind’s freedom to think or not, the only will you have, your only
freedom. [This is] the choice that controls all the choices you make
and determines your life and character.” Thus Objectivism rejects
any form of determinism, the belief that man is a victim of forces
beyond his control (such as God, fate, upbringing, genes, or
economic conditions).
4. Ethics: “Reason is man’s only proper judge of values and his only
proper guide to action. The proper standard of ethics is: man’s
survival qua man—i.e., that which is required by man’s nature for
his survival as a rational being (not his momentary physical
survival as a mindless brute). Rationality is man’s basic virtue, and
his three fundamental values are: reason, purpose, self-esteem. Man
—every man—is an end in himself, not a means to the ends of
others; he must live for his own sake, neither sacrificing himself to
others nor sacrificing others to himself; he must work for his
rational self-interest, with the achievement of his own happiness as
the highest moral purpose of his life.” Thus Objectivism rejects any
form of altruism—the claim that morality consists in living for
others or for society.
5. Politics: “The basic social principle of the Objectivist ethics is that
no man has the right to seek values from others by means of
physical force—i.e., no man or group has the right to initiate the use
of physical force against others. Men have the right to use force only
in self-defense and only against those who initiate its use. Men must
deal with one another as traders, giving value for value, by free,
mutual consent to mutual benefit. The only social system that bars
physical force from human relationships is laissez-faire capitalism.
Capitalism is a system based on the recognition of individual rights,
including property rights, in which the only function of the
government is to protect individual rights, i.e., to protect men from
those who initiate the use of physical force.” Thus Objectivism
rejects any form of collectivism, such as fascism or socialism. It also
rejects the current “mixed economy” notion that the government
should regulate the economy and redistribute wealth.
6. Esthetics: “Art is a selective re-creation of reality according to an
artist’s metaphysical value-judgments.” The purpose of art is to
concretize the artist’s fundamental view of existence. Ayn Rand
described her own approach to art as “Romantic Realism”: “I am a
Romantic in the sense that I present men as they ought to be. I am
Realistic in the sense that I place them here and now and on this
earth.” The goal of Ayn Rand’s novels is not didactic but artistic: the
projection of an ideal man: “My purpose, first cause and prime
mover is the portrayal of Howard Roark or John Galt or Hank
Rearden or Francisco d’Anconia as an end in himself—not as a
means to any further end.”
OceanofPDF.com
GUIDE TO THE WRITINGS OF Ayn Rand
NOVELS:
Atlas Shrugged (1957): Ayn Rand’s masterpiece. It integrates the basic
elements of an entire philosophy into a highly complex, yet dramatically
compelling plot—set in a near-future U.S.A. whose economy is collapsing
as a result of the mysterious disappearance of leading innovators and
industrialists. The theme is: “the role of the mind in man’s existence—and,
as corollary, the demonstration of a new moral philosophy: the morality of
rational self-interest.”
The Fountainhead (1943): The story of an innovator—architect Howard
Roark—and his battle against the tradition-worshipping establishment. Its
theme: “individualism versus collectivism, not in politics, but in man’s soul;
the psychological motivations and the basic premises that produce the
character of an individualist or a collectivist.” Ayn Rand presented here for
the first time her projection of the ideal man. Roark’s independence, self-
esteem, and integrity have inspired millions of readers for more than half a
century.
Anthem (1938): This novelette depicts a world of the future, a society so
collectivized that even the word “I” has vanished from the language.
Anthem’s theme is: the meaning and glory of man’s ego. We the Living
(1936): Set in Soviet Russia, this is Ayn Rand’s first and most
autobiographical novel. Its theme is: “the individual against the state, the
supreme value of a human life and the evil of the totalitarian state that
claims the right to sacrifice it.”
 
OTHER FICTION:
Night of January 16th (1934): This play is a murder trial abounding in plot
twists and original devices. The play has two different endings available—
to reflect the actual verdict of a jury selected each performance from the
audience.
The Early Ayn Rand (1984): This collection includes the first fiction Ayn
Rand ever sold—the synopsis of an original screenplay, “Red Pawn.” It also
contains unpolished, but charming short stories which she wrote in the late
1920s and early 1930s while she was still learning English, and mature
works such as the stage plays Think Twice and Ideal and scenes cut from the
published edition of The Fountainhead.
 
GENERAL PHILOSOPHY:
For the New Intellectual (1961): A collection of the most challenging
philosophical statements by the characters in her novels. The 48-page title
essay sweeps over the history of thought, showing how ideas control
civilization and how philosophy has served for the most part as an engine of
destruction.
Philosophy: Who Needs It (1982): Everybody needs philosophy—that is
the theme of this book. It demonstrates that philosophy is essential in each
person’s life, and how those who do not think philosophically are the
helpless victims of the ideas they passively accept from others. Essays
include the title essay, “Philosophical Detection,” and “Causality Versus
Duty.”
The Voice of Reason: Essays in Objectivist Thought (1989): Philosophy
and cultural analysis, including “Who Is the Final Authority in Ethics?”
Also “Religion Versus America” by Leonard Peikoff, and a critique of
Libertarianism by Peter Schwartz.
 
EPISTEMOLOGY:
Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology (Second Edition, 1990): The
Objectivist theory of concepts, with Ayn Rand’s solution to “the problem of
universals,” identifying the relationship of abstractions to concretes.
Includes an essay by Leonard Peikoff, “The Analytic-Synthetic
Dichotomy,” and, as an appendix, transcripts of Ayn Rand’s workshops—
containing her answers to questions about her theory raised by philosophers
and other academics.
 
ETHICS:
The Virtue of Selfishness (1964): Ayn Rand’s revolutionary concept of
egoism. Essays on the morality of rational selfishness and the political and
social implications of such a moral philosophy. Essays include: “The
Objectivist Ethics,” “Man’s Rights,” “The Nature of Government,” “The
‘Conflicts’ of Men’s Interests,” and “Racism.”
 
POLITICS:
Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal (1966): Essays on the theory and history
of capitalism arguing that it is the only moral economic system, i.e., the
only one consistent with individual rights and a free society. Includes:
“What Is Capitalism?” “The Roots of War,” “Conservatism: An Obituary,”
and “The Anatomy of Compromise.”
The Return of the Primitive (1971): Ayn Rand’s answer to
environmentalism, 
“progressive” 
education, 
and 
other 
anti-reason
movements.
 
ART AND LITERATURE:
The Romantic Manifesto (1969): Ayn Rand’s philosophy of art, with a new
analysis of the Romantic school of literature. Essays include: “Philosophy
and Sense of Life,” “The Psycho-Epistemology of Art,” and “What Is
Romanticism?”
OceanofPDF.com
BOOKS ABOUT Ayn Rand AND OBJECTIVISM
The Ayn Rand Lexicon: Objectivism from A to Z (1986): A mini-
encyclopedia of Objectivism, covering 400 alphabetized topics in
philosophy and related fields. Edited by Harry Binswanger.
The Ominous Parallels: The End of Freedom in America (1982) by
Leonard Peikoff. The Objectivist philosophy of history—through an
analysis of the philosophical causes of Nazism, and their parallels in
contemporary America.
Objectivism: The Philosophy of Ayn Rand (1991) by Leonard Peikoff. This
is the definitive, systematic statement of Ayn Rand’s philosophy, based on
Dr. Peikoff’s thirty years of philosophical discussions with her. All of the
key principles of Objectivism—from metaphysics to art—are presented in a
logical, hierarchical structure.
Letters of Ayn Rand (1995): This collection of more than 500 letters written
by Ayn Rand offers much new information on her life as philosopher,
novelist, political activist, and Hollywood screenwriter. Includes letters to
fans, friends, celebrities, business leaders, and philosophers. Edited by
Michael S. Berliner.
Journals of Ayn Rand (1997): Contains Ayn Rand’s notes for her three
main novels—along with early explorations into the basic questions of
philosophy. Edited by David Harriman.
The Ayn Rand Reader (1999): A collection of excerpts from Ayn Rand’s
fiction and nonfiction, exploring many of the essentials of her philosophy,
Objectivism. Edited by Gary Hull and Leonard Peikoff.
The Art of Fiction (2000): The edited version of an informal series of
lectures given by Ayn Rand on the essentials of fiction writing. Edited by
Tore Boeckmann.
The Art of Nonfiction (2001): Edited transcripts of Ayn Rand’s lectures on
writing effective nonfiction—a skill she believed could be learned and
mastered by any rational person.
OceanofPDF.com
ABOUT THE Ayn Rand INSTITUTE
The Ayn Rand Institute, a nonprofit educational organization, was
established in 1985 to serve as the center for the advancement of
Objectivism.
Objectivism holds that historical trends are the product of philosophy. To
reverse today’s destructive political and cultural trends we must reverse
men’s fundamental philosophy.
The Institute brings Ayn Rand’s ideas to the attention of students,
scholars, businessmen, professionals, and the general public. Its Objectivist
Academic Center provides university-level training in Objectivist
philosophy and sponsors writing grants, fellowships, and scholarly
publications. The Institute’s other programs include essay contests for high
school and college students, a network of campus Objectivist clubs, and a
campus speakers bureau.
For more information about the activities of the Institute, please contact:
The Ayn Rand Institute
P.O. Box 51808
Irvine, CA 92619-1808
Web site: http://www.Aynrand.org/
OceanofPDF.com
What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
 
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news
about this author.
Sign up now.
OceanofPDF.com