CHAPTER 6
Data Loading, Storage, and File Formats
Reading data and making it accessible (often called data loading) is a necessary first
step for using most of the tools in this book. The term parsing is also sometimes used
to describe loading text data and interpreting it as tables and different data types. I’m
going to focus on data input and output using pandas, though there are numerous
tools in other libraries to help with reading and writing data in various formats.
Input and output typically fall into a few main categories: reading text files and other
more efficient on-disk formats, loading data from databases, and interacting with
network sources like web APIs.
6.1 Reading and Writing Data in Text Format
pandas features a number of functions for reading tabular data as a DataFrame
object. Table 6-1 summarizes some of them; pandas.read_csv is one of the most
frequently used in this book. We will look at binary data formats later in Section 6.2,
“Binary Data Formats,” on page 193.
Table 6-1. Text and binary data loading functions in pandas
Function
Description
read_csv
Load delimited data from a file, URL, or file-like object; use comma as default delimiter
read_fwf
Read data in fixed-width column format (i.e., no delimiters)
read_clipboard
Variation of read_csv that reads data from the clipboard; useful for converting tables from web
pages
read_excel
Read tabular data from an Excel XLS or XLSX file
read_hdf
Read HDF5 files written by pandas
read_html
Read all tables found in the given HTML document
read_json
Read data from a JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) string representation, file, URL, or file-like object
175
Function
Description
read_feather
Read the Feather binary file format
read_orc
Read the Apache ORC binary file format
read_parquet
Read the Apache Parquet binary file format
read_pickle
Read an object stored by pandas using the Python pickle format
read_sas
Read a SAS dataset stored in one of the SAS system’s custom storage formats
read_spss
Read a data file created by SPSS
read_sql
Read the results of a SQL query (using SQLAlchemy)
read_sql_table
Read a whole SQL table (using SQLAlchemy); equivalent to using a query that selects everything in
that table using read_sql
read_stata
Read a dataset from Stata file format
read_xml
Read a table of data from an XML file
I’ll give an overview of the mechanics of these functions, which are meant to convert
text data into a DataFrame. The optional arguments for these functions may fall into
a few categories:
Indexing
Can treat one or more columns as the returned DataFrame, and whether to get
column names from the file, arguments you provide, or not at all.
Type inference and data conversion
Includes the user-defined value conversions and custom list of missing value
markers.
Date and time parsing
Includes a combining capability, including combining date and time information
spread over multiple columns into a single column in the result.
Iterating
Support for iterating over chunks of very large files.
Unclean data issues
Includes skipping rows or a footer, comments, or other minor things like
numeric data with thousands separated by commas.
Because of how messy data in the real world can be, some of the data loading
functions (especially pandas.read_csv) have accumulated a long list of optional
arguments over time. It’s normal to feel overwhelmed by the number of different
parameters (pandas.read_csv has around 50). The online pandas documentation
has many examples about how each of these works, so if you’re struggling to read a
particular file, there might be a similar enough example to help you find the right
parameters.
176 
|