CHAPTER 9
Plotting and Visualization
Making informative visualizations (sometimes called plots) is one of the most impor‐
tant tasks in data analysis. It may be a part of the exploratory process—for example,
to help identify outliers or needed data transformations, or as a way of generating
ideas for models. For others, building an interactive visualization for the web may
be the end goal. Python has many add-on libraries for making static or dynamic
visualizations, but I’ll be mainly focused on matplotlib and libraries that build on top
of it.
matplotlib is a desktop plotting package designed for creating plots and figures
suitable for publication. The project was started by John Hunter in 2002 to enable
a MATLAB-like plotting interface in Python. The matplotlib and IPython commun‐
ities have collaborated to simplify interactive plotting from the IPython shell (and
now, Jupyter notebook). matplotlib supports various GUI backends on all operating
systems and can export visualizations to all of the common vector and raster graphics
formats (PDF, SVG, JPG, PNG, BMP, GIF, etc.). With the exception of a few diagrams,
nearly all of the graphics in this book were produced using matplotlib.
Over time, matplotlib has spawned a number of add-on toolkits for data visualization
that use matplotlib for their underlying plotting. One of these is seaborn, which we
explore later in this chapter.
The simplest way to follow the code examples in the chapter is to output plots in
the Jupyter notebook. To set this up, execute the following statement in a Jupyter
notebook:
%matplotlib inline
281
Since this book’s first edition in 2012, many new data visualization
libraries have been created, some of which (like Bokeh and Altair)
take advantage of modern web technology to create interactive
visualizations that integrate well with the Jupyter notebook. Rather
than use multiple visualization tools in this book, I decided to stick
with matplotlib for teaching the fundamentals, in particular since
pandas has good integration with matplotlib. You can adapt the
principles from this chapter to learn how to use other visualization
libraries as well.
9.1 A Brief matplotlib API Primer
With matplotlib, we use the following import convention:
In [13]: import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
After running %matplotlib notebook in Jupyter (or simply %matplotlib in IPy‐
thon), we can try creating a simple plot. If everything is set up right, a line plot like
Figure 9-1 should appear:
In [14]: data = np.arange(10)
In [15]: data
Out[15]: array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])
In [16]: plt.plot(data)
Figure 9-1. Simple line plot
282 
|