chapter in this book’s GitHub
repository at https://github.com/wesm/pydata-book, which is mirrored to Gitee (for
those who cannot access GitHub) at https://gitee.com/wesmckinn/pydata-book.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example code is
offered with this book, you may use it in your programs and documentation. You
do not need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant
portion of the code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of code
from this book does not require permission. Selling or distributing examples from
O’Reilly books does require permission. Answering a question by citing this book
and quoting example code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant
amount of example code from this book into your product’s documentation does
require permission.
xii 
| 
Preface
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually includes the
title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Python for Data Analysis by Wes
McKinney (O’Reilly). Copyright 2022 Wes McKinney, 978-1-098-10403-0.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given
above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.
O’Reilly Online Learning
For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technol‐
ogy and business training, knowledge, and insight to help
companies succeed.
Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and expertise
through books, articles, and our online learning platform. O’Reilly’s online learning
platform gives you on-demand access to live training courses, in-depth learning
paths, interactive coding environments, and a vast collection of text and video from
O’Reilly and 200+ other publishers. For more information, visit http://oreilly.com.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at https://oreil.ly/python-data-analysis-3e.
Email bookquestions@oreilly.com to comment or ask technical questions about this
book.
For news and information about our books and courses, visit http://oreilly.com.
Find us on LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/company/oreilly-media.
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia.
Watch us on YouTube: http://youtube.com/oreillymedia.
Preface 
| 
xiii
Acknowledgments
This work is the product of many years of fruitful discussions and collaborations
with, and assistance from many people around the world. I’d like to thank a few of
them.
In Memoriam: John D. Hunter (1968–2012)
Our dear friend and colleague John D. Hunter passed away after a battle with colon
cancer on August 28, 2012. This was only a short time after I’d completed the final
manuscript for this book’s first edition.
John’s impact and legacy in the Python scientific and data communities would be
hard to overstate. In addition to developing matplotlib in the early 2000s (a time
when Python was not nearly so popular), he helped shape the culture of a critical
generation of open source developers who’ve become pillars of the Python ecosystem
that we now often take for granted.
I was lucky enough to connect with John early in my open source career in January
2010, just after releasing pandas 0.1. His inspiration and mentorship helped me push
forward, even in the darkest of times, with my vision for pandas and Python as a
first-class data analysis language.
John was very close with Fernando Pérez and Brian Granger, pioneers of IPython,
Jupyter, and many other initiatives in the Python community. We had hoped to work
on a book together, the four of us, but I ended up being the one with the most free
time. I am sure he would be proud of what we’ve accomplished, as individuals and as
a community, over the last nine years.
Acknowledgments for the Third Edition (2022)
It has more than a decade since I started writing the first edition of this book and
more than 15 years since I originally started my journey as a Python prorammer.
A lot has changed since then! Python has evolved from a relatively niche language
for data analysis to the most popular and most widely used language powering
the plurality (if not the majority!) of data science, machine learning, and artificial
intelligence work.
I have not been an active contributor to the pandas open source project since 2013,
but its worldwide developer community has continued to thrive, serving as a model
of community-centric open source software development. Many “next-generation”
Python projects that deal with tabular data are modeling their user interfaces directly
after pandas, so the project has proved to have an enduring influence on the future
trajectory of the Python data science ecosystem.
xiv 
| 
Preface
I hope that this book continues to serve as a valuable resource for students and
individuals who want to learn about working with data in Python.
I’m especially thankful to O’Reilly for allowing me to publish an “open access” version
of this book on my website at https://wesmckinney.com/book, where I hope it will
reach even more people and help expand opportunity in the world of data analysis.
J.J. Allaire was a lifesaver in making this possible by helping me “port” the book from
Docbook XML to Quarto, a wonderful new scientific and technical publishing system
for print and web.
Special thanks to my technical reviewers Paul Barry, Jean-Christophe Leyder, Abdul‐
lah Karasan, and William Jamir, whose thorough feedback has greatly improved the
readability, clarity, and understandability of the content.
Acknowledgments for the Second Edition (2017)
It has been five years almost to the day since I completed the manuscript for
this book’s first edition in July 2012. A lot has changed. The Python community
has grown immensely, and the ecosystem of open source software around it has
flourished.
This new edition of the book would not exist if not for the tireless efforts of the
pandas core developers, who have grown the project and its user community into
one of the cornerstones of the Python data science ecosystem. These include, but are
not limited to, Tom Augspurger, Joris van den Bossche, Chris Bartak, Phillip Cloud,
gfyoung, Andy Hayden, Masaaki Horikoshi, Stephan Hoyer, Adam Klein, Wouter
Overmeire, Jeff Reback, Chang She, Skipper Seabold, Jeff Tratner, and y-p.
On the actual writing of this second edition, I would like to thank the O’Reilly staff
who helped me patiently with the writing process. This includes Marie Beaugureau,
Ben Lorica, and Colleen Toporek. I again had outstanding technical reviewers with
Tom Augspurger, Paul Barry, Hugh Brown, Jonathan Coe, and Andreas Müller con‐
tributing. Thank you.
This book’s first edition has been translated into many foreign languages, including
Chinese, French, German, Japanese, Korean, and Russian. Translating all this content
and making it available to a broader audience is a huge and often thankless effort.
Thank you for helping more people in the world learn how to program and use data
analysis tools.
I am also lucky to have had support for my continued open source development
efforts from Cloudera and Two Sigma Investments over the last few years. With open
source software projects more thinly resourced than ever relative to the size of user
bases, it is becoming increasingly important for businesses to provide support for
development of key open source projects. It’s the right thing to do.
Preface 
| 
xv
Acknowledgments for the First Edition (2012)
It would have been difficult for me to write this book without the support of a large
number of people.
On the O’Reilly staff, I’m very grateful for my editors, Meghan Blanchette and Julie
Steele, who guided me through the process. Mike Loukides also worked with me in
the proposal stages and helped make the book a reality.
I received a wealth of technical review from a large cast of characters. In particu‐
lar, Martin Blais and Hugh Brown were incredibly helpful in improving the book’s
examples, clarity, and organization from cover to cover. James Long, Drew Conway,
Fernando Pérez, Brian Granger, Thomas Kluyver, Adam Klein, Josh Klein, Chang
She, and Stéfan van der Walt each reviewed one or more chapters, providing pointed
feedback from many different perspectives.
I got many great ideas for examples and datasets from friends and colleagues in the
data community, among them: Mike Dewar, Jeff Hammerbacher, James Johndrow,
Kristian Lum, Adam Klein, Hilary Mason, Chang She, and Ashley Williams.
I am of course indebted to the many leaders in the open source scientific Python
community who’ve built the foundation for my development work and gave encour‐
agement while I was writing this book: the IPython core team (Fernando Pérez,
Brian Granger, Min Ragan-Kelly, Thomas Kluyver, and others), John Hunter, Skipper
Seabold, Travis Oliphant, Peter Wang, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Josef Perktold, Fran‐
cesc Alted, Chris Fonnesbeck, and too many others to mention. Several other people
provided a great deal of support, ideas, and encouragement along the way: Drew
Conway, Sean Taylor, Giuseppe Paleologo, Jared Lander, David Epstein, John Krowas,
Joshua Bloom, Den Pilsworth, John Myles-White, and many others I’ve forgotten.
I’d also like to thank a number of people from my formative years. First, my former
AQR colleagues who’ve cheered me on in my pandas work over the years: Alex Reyf‐
man, Michael Wong, Tim Sargen, Oktay Kurbanov, Matthew Tschantz, Roni Israelov,
Michael Katz, Ari Levine, Chris Uga, Prasad Ramanan, Ted Square, and Hoon Kim.
Lastly, my academic advisors Haynes Miller (MIT) and Mike West (Duke).
I received significant help from Phillip Cloud and Joris van den Bossche in 2014 to
update the book’s code examples and fix some other inaccuracies due to changes in
pandas.
On the personal side, Casey provided invaluable day-to-day support during the
writing process, tolerating my highs and lows as I hacked together the final draft on
top of an already overcommitted schedule. Lastly, my parents, Bill and Kim, taught
me to always follow my dreams and to never settle for less.
xvi 
| 
Preface