Chapter 3 to enable you to follow along with the rest of the book.
Much of this book focuses on table-based analytics and data preparation tools for
working with datasets that are small enough to fit on your personal computer. To
use these tools you must sometimes do some wrangling to arrange messy data into
a more nicely tabular (or structured) form. Fortunately, Python is an ideal language
for doing this. The greater your facility with the Python language and its built-in data
types, the easier it will be for you to prepare new datasets for analysis.
Some of the tools in this book are best explored from a live IPython or Jupyter
session. Once you learn how to start up IPython and Jupyter, I recommend that you
follow along with the examples so you can experiment and try different things. As
17
with any keyboard-driven console-like environment, developing familiarity with the
common commands is also part of the learning curve.
There are introductory Python concepts that this chapter does not
cover, like classes and object-oriented programming, which you
may find useful in your foray into data analysis in Python.
To deepen your Python language knowledge, I recommend that
you supplement this chapter with the official Python tutorial and
potentially one of the many excellent books on general-purpose
Python programming. Some recommendations to get you started
include:
• Python Cookbook, Third Edition, by David Beazley and Brian
•
K. Jones (O’Reilly)
• Fluent Python by Luciano Ramalho (O’Reilly)
•
• Effective Python, Second Edition, by Brett Slatkin (Addison-
•
Wesley)
2.1 The Python Interpreter
Python is an interpreted language. The Python interpreter runs a program by execut‐
ing one statement at a time. The standard interactive Python interpreter can be
invoked on the command line with the python command:
$ python
Python 3.10.4 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Mar 24 2022, 17:38:57)
[GCC 10.3.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> a = 5
>>> print(a)
5
The >>> you see is the prompt after which you’ll type code expressions. To exit the
Python interpreter, you can either type exit() or press Ctrl-D (works on Linux and
macOS only).
Running Python programs is as simple as calling python with a .py file as its first
argument. Suppose we had created hello_world.py with these contents:
print("Hello world")
You can run it by executing the following command (the hello_world.py file must be
in your current working terminal directory):
$ python hello_world.py
Hello world
18 
|