CHAPTER 1
Preliminaries
1.1 What Is This Book About?
This book is concerned with the nuts and bolts of manipulating, processing, cleaning,
and crunching data in Python. My goal is to offer a guide to the parts of the Python
programming language and its data-oriented library ecosystem and tools that will
equip you to become an effective data analyst. While “data analysis” is in the title
of the book, the focus is specifically on Python programming, libraries, and tools as
opposed to data analysis methodology. This is the Python programming you need for
data analysis.
Sometime after I originally published this book in 2012, people started using the
term data science as an umbrella description for everything from simple descriptive
statistics to more advanced statistical analysis and machine learning. The Python
open source ecosystem for doing data analysis (or data science) has also expanded
significantly since then. There are now many other books which focus specifically on
these more advanced methodologies. My hope is that this book serves as adequate
preparation to enable you to move on to a more domain-specific resource.
Some might characterize much of the content of the book as “data
manipulation” as opposed to “data analysis.” We also use the terms
wrangling or munging to refer to data manipulation.
What Kinds of Data?
When I say “data,” what am I referring to exactly? The primary focus is on structured
data, a deliberately vague term that encompasses many different common forms of
data, such as:
1
• Tabular or spreadsheet-like data in which each column may be a different type
•
(string, numeric, date, or otherwise). This includes most kinds of data commonly
stored in relational databases or tab- or comma-delimited text files.
• Multidimensional arrays (matrices).
•
• Multiple tables of data interrelated by key columns (what would be primary or
•
foreign keys for a SQL user).
• Evenly or unevenly spaced time series.
•
This is by no means a complete list. Even though it may not always be obvious, a
large percentage of datasets can be transformed into a structured form that is more
suitable for analysis and modeling. If not, it may be possible to extract features from
a dataset into a structured form. As an example, a collection of news articles could
be processed into a word frequency table, which could then be used to perform
sentiment analysis.
Most users of spreadsheet programs like Microsoft Excel, perhaps the most widely
used data analysis tool in the world, will not be strangers to these kinds of data.
1.2 Why Python for Data Analysis?
For many people, the Python programming language has strong appeal. Since its
first appearance in 1991, Python has become one of the most popular interpreted
programming languages, along with Perl, Ruby, and others. Python and Ruby have
become especially popular since 2005 or so for building websites using their numer‐
ous web frameworks, like Rails (Ruby) and Django (Python). Such languages are
often called scripting languages, as they can be used to quickly write small programs,
or scripts to automate other tasks. I don’t like the term “scripting languages,” as it
carries a connotation that they cannot be used for building serious software. Among
interpreted languages, for various historical and cultural reasons, Python has devel‐
oped a large and active scientific computing and data analysis community. In the last
20 years, Python has gone from a bleeding-edge or “at your own risk” scientific com‐
puting language to one of the most important languages for data science, machine
learning, and general software development in academia and industry.
For data analysis and interactive computing and data visualization, Python will inevi‐
tably draw comparisons with other open source and commercial programming lan‐
guages and tools in wide use, such as R, MATLAB, SAS, Stata, and others. In recent
years, Python’s improved open source libraries (such as pandas and scikit-learn) have
made it a popular choice for data analysis tasks. Combined with Python’s overall
strength for general-purpose software engineering, it is an excellent option as a
primary language for building data applications.
2 
|