Chapter IX
THE GENERATOR
“Get the hell out of my way!”
Dr. Robert Stadler heard it on the radio in his car. He did not know
whether the next sound, part-gasp, part-scream, part-laughter, started rising
from him or from the radio—but he heard the click that cut them both off.
The radio went dead. No further sounds came from the Wayne-Falkland
Hotel.
He jerked his hand from knob to knob under the lighted dial. Nothing
came through, no explanations, no pleas of technical trouble, no silence-
hiding music. All stations were off the air.
He shuddered, he gripped the wheel, leaning forward across it, like a
jockey at the close of a race, and his foot pressed down on the accelerator.
The small stretch of highway before him bounced with the leaping of his
headlights. There was nothing beyond the lighted strip but the emptiness of
the prairies of Iowa.
He did not know why he had been listening to the broadcast; he did not
know what made him tremble now. He chuckled abruptly—it sounded like
a malevolent growl—either at the radio, or at those in the city, or at the sky.
He was watching the rare posts of highway numbers. He did not need to
consult a map: for four days, that map had been printed on his brain, like a
net of lines traced in acid. They could not take it away from him, he
thought; they could not stop him. He felt as if he were being pursued; but
there was nothing for miles behind him, except the two red lights on the
rear of his car—like two small signals of danger, fleeing through the
darkness of the Iowa plains.
The motive directing his hands and feet was four days behind him. It was
the face of the man on the window sill, and the faces he had confronted
when he had escaped from that room. He had cried to them that he could
not deal with Galt and neither could they, that Galt would destroy them all,
unless they destroyed him first. “Don’t get smart, Professor,” Mr.
Thompson had answered coldly. “You’ve done an awful lot of yelling about
hating his guts, but when it comes to action, you haven’t helped us at all. I
don’t know which side you’re on. If he doesn’t give in to us peaceably, we
might have to resort to pressure—such as hostages whom he wouldn’t want
to see hurt—and you’re first on the list, Professor.” “I?” he had screamed,
shaking with terror and with bitterly desperate laughter. “I? But he damns
me more than anyone on earth!” “How do I know?” Mr. Thompson had
answered. “I heard that you used to be his teacher. And, don’t forget, you’re
the only one he asked for.”
His mind liquid with terror, he had felt as if he were about to be crushed
between two walls advancing upon him: he had no chance, if Galt refused
to surrender—and less chance, if Galt joined these men. It was then that a
distant shape had come swimming forward in his mind: the image of a
mushroom-domed structure in the middle of an Iowa plain.
All images had begun to fuse in his mind thereafter. Project X—he had
thought, not knowing whether it was the vision of that structure or of a
feudal castle commanding the countryside, that gave him the sense of an
age and a world to which he belonged . . . I’m Robert Stadler—he had
thought—it’s my property, it came from my discoveries, they said it was I
who invented it. . . . I’ll show them!—he had thought, not knowing whether
he meant the man on the window sill or the others or the whole of mankind.
. . . His thoughts had become like chips floating in a liquid, without
connections: To seize control . . . I’ll show them! . . . To seize control, to
rule . . . There is no other way to live on earth. . . .
These had been the only words that named the plan in his mind. He had
felt that the rest was clear to him—clear in the form of a savage emotion
crying defiantly that he did not have to make it clear. He would seize
control of Project X and he would rule a part of the country as his private
feudal domain. The means? His emotion had answered: Somehow. The
motive? His mind had repeated insistently that his motive was terror of Mr.
Thompson’s gang, that he was not safe among them any longer, that his
plan was a practical necessity. In the depth of his liquid brain, his emotion
had held another kind of terror, drowned along with the connections
between his broken chips of words.
These chips had been the only compass directing his course through four
days and nights—while he drove down deserted highways, across a country
collapsing into chaos, while he developed a monomaniac’s cunning for
obtaining illegal purchases of gas, while he snatched random hours of
restless sleep, in obscure motels, under assumed names. . . . I’m Robert
Stadler—he had thought, his mind repeating it as a formula of omnipotence.
. . . To seize control—he had thought, speeding against the futile traffic
lights of half-abandoned towns—speeding on the vibrating steel of the
Taggart Bridge across the Mississippi—speeding past the occasional ruins
of farms in the empty stretches of Iowa. . . . I’ll show them—he had thought
—let them pursue, they won’t stop me this time. . . . He had thought it, even
though no one had pursued him—as no one was pursuing him now, but the
taillights of his own car and the motive drowned in his mind.
He looked at his silent radio and chuckled; the chuckle had the emotional
quality of a fist being shaken at space. It’s I who am practical—he thought
—I have no choice . . . I have no other way . . . I’ll show all those insolent
gangsters, who forget that I am Robert Stadler . . . They will all collapse,
but I won’t! . . . I’ll survive . . . I’ll win! . . . I’ll show them!
The words were like chunks of solid ground in his mind, in the midst of a
fiercely silent swamp; the connections lay submerged at the bottom. If
connected, his words would have formed the sentence: I’ll show him that
there is no other way to live on earth! . . .
The scattered lights in the distance ahead were the barracks erected on
the site of Project X, now known as Harmony City. He observed, as he
came closer, that something out of the ordinary was going on at Project X.
The barbed-wire fence was broken, and no sentinels met him at the gate.
But some sort of abnormal activity was churning in the patches of darkness
and in the glare of some wavering spotlights: there were armored trucks and
running figures and shouted orders and the gleam of bayonets. No one
stopped his car. At the corner of a shanty, he saw the motionless body of a
soldier sprawled on the ground. Drunk—he thought, preferring to think it,
wondering why he felt unsure of it.
The mushroom structure crouched on a knoll before him; there were
lights in the narrow slits of its windows—and the shapeless funnels
protruded from under its dome, aimed at the darkness of the country. A
soldier barred his way, when he alighted from his car at the entrance. The
soldier was properly armed, but hatless, and his uniform seemed too sloppy.
“Where are you going, bud?” he asked.
“Let me in!” Dr. Stadler ordered contemptuously.
“What’s your business here?”
“I’m Dr. Robert Stadler.”
“I’m Joe Blow. I said, What’s your business? Are you one of the new or
one of the old?”
“Let me in, you idiot! I’m Dr. Robert Stadler!”
It was not the name, but the tone of the voice and the form of address that
seemed to convince the soldier. “One of the new,” he said and, opening the
door, shouted to somebody inside, “Hey, Mac, take care of Grandpaw here,
see what he wants!”
In the bare, dim hall of reinforced concrete, he was met by a man who
might have been an officer, except that his tunic was open at the throat and
a cigarette hung insolently in the corner of his mouth.
“Who are you?” he snapped, his hands jerking too swiftly to the holster
on his hip.
“I’m Dr. Robert Stadler.”
The name had no effect. “Who gave you permission to come here?”
“I need no permission.”
This seemed to have an effect; the man removed the cigarette from his
mouth. “Who sent for you?” he asked, a shade uncertainly.
“Will you please let me speak to the commandant?” Dr. Stadler
demanded impatiently.
“The commandant? You’re too late, brother.”
“The chief engineer, then!”
“The chief-who? Oh, Willie? Willie’s okay, he’s one of us, but he’s out on
an errand just now.”
There were other figures in the hall listening with an apprehensive
curiosity. The officer’s hand summoned one of them to approach—an
unshaved civilian with a shabby overcoat thrown over his shoulders. “What
do you want?” he snapped at Stadler.
“Would someone please tell me where are the gentlemen of the scientific
staff?” Dr. Stadler asked in the courteously peremptory tone of an order.
The two men glanced at each other, as if such a question were irrelevant
in this place. “Do you come from Washington?” the civilian asked
suspiciously.
“I do not. I will have you understand that I’m through with that
Washington gang.”
“Oh?” The man seemed pleased. “Are you a Friend of the People, then?”
“I would say that I’m the best friend the people ever had. I’m the man
who gave them all this.” He pointed around him.
“You did?” said the man, impressed. “Are you one of those who made a
deal with the Boss?”
“I’m the boss here, from now on.”
The men looked at each other, retreating a few steps. The officer asked,
“Did you say the name was Stadler?”
“Robert Stadler. And if you don’t know what that means, you’ll find
out!”
“Will you please follow me, sir?” said the officer, with shaky politeness.
What happened next was not clear to Dr. Stadler, because his mind
refused to admit the reality of the things he was seeing. There were shifting
figures in half-lighted, disordered offices, there were too many firearms on
everybody’s hips, there were senseless questions asked of him by jerky
voices that alternated between impertinence and fear. He did not know
whether any of them tried to give him an explanation; he would not listen;
he could not permit this to be true. He kept stating in the tone of a feudal
sovereign, “I’m the boss here, from now on . . . I give the orders . . . I came
to take over . . . I own this place. . . . I am Dr. Robert Stadler—and if you
don’t know that name in this place, you have no business being here, you
infernal idiots! You’ll blow yourselves to pieces, if that’s the state of your
knowledge! Have you had a high-school course in physics? You don’t look
to me as if you’ve ever been allowed inside a high school, any of you! What
are you doing here? Who are you?”
It took him a long time to grasp—when his mind could not block it any
longer—that somebody had beaten him to his plan: somebody had held the
same view of existence as his own and had set out to achieve the same
future. He grasped that these men, who called themselves the Friends of the
People, had seized possession of Project X, tonight, a few hours ago,
intending to establish a reign of their own. He laughed in their faces, with
bitterly incredulous contempt.
“You don’t know what you’re doing, you miserable juvenile delinquents!
Do you think that you—you!—can handle a high-precision instrument of
science? Who is your leader? I demand to see your leader!”
It was his tone of overbearing authority, his contempt and their own panic
—the blind panic of men of unbridled violence, who have no standards of
safety or danger—that made them waver and wonder whether he was,
perhaps, some secret top-level member of their leadership; they were
equally ready to defy or obey any authority. After being shunted from one
jittery commander to another, he found himself at last being led down iron
stairways and down long, echoing, underground corridors of reinforced
concrete to an audience with “The Boss” in person.
The Boss had taken refuge in the underground control room. Among the
complex spirals of the delicate scientific machinery that produced the sound
ray, against the wall panel of glittering levers, dials and gauges, known as
the Xylophone, Robert Stadler faced the new ruler of Project X. It was
Cuffy Meigs.
He wore a tight, semi-military tunic and leather leggings; the flesh of his
neck bulged over the edge of his collar; his black curls were matted with
sweat. He was pacing restlessly, unsteadily in front of the Xylophone,
shouting orders to men who kept rushing in and out of the room:
“Send couriers to every county seat within our reach! Tell ’em that the
Friends of the People have won! Tell ’em they’re not to take orders from
Washington any longer! The new capital of the People’s Commonwealth is
Harmony City, henceforth to be known as Meigsville! Tell ’em that I’ll
expect five hundred thousand dollars per every five thousand heads of
population, by tomorrow morning—or else!”
It took some time before Cuffy Meigs’ attention and bleary brown eyes
could be drawn to focus on the person of Dr. Stadler. “Well, what is it?
What is it?” he snapped.
“I am Dr. Robert Stadler.”
“Huh?—Oh, yeah! Yeah! You’re the big guy from outer spaces, aren’t
you? You’re the fellow who catches atoms or something. Well, what on
earth are you doing here?”
“It is I who should ask you that question.”
“Huh? Look, Professor, I’m in no mood for jokes.”
“I have come here to take control.”
“Control? Of what?”
“Of this equipment. Of this place. Of the countryside within its radius of
operation.”
Meigs stared at him blankly for a moment, then asked softly, “How did
you get here?”
“By car.”
“I mean, whom did you bring with you?”
“Nobody.”
“What weapons did you bring?”
“None. My name is sufficient.”
“You came here alone, with your name and your car?”
“I did.”
Cuffy Meigs burst out laughing in his face.
“Do you think,” asked Dr. Stadler, “that you can operate an installation of
this kind?”
“Run along, Professor, run along! Beat it, before I have you shot! We’ve
got no use for intellectuals around here!”
“How much do you know about this?” Dr. Stadler pointed at the
Xylophone.
“Who cares? Technicians are a dime a dozen these days! Beat it! This
ain’t Washington! I’m through with those impractical dreamers in
Washington! They won’t get anywhere, bargaining with that radio ghost and
making speeches! Action—that’s what’s needed! Direct action! Beat it,
Doc! Your day is over!” He was weaving unsteadily back and forth,
catching at a lever of the Xylophone once in a while. Dr. Stadler realized
that Meigs was drunk.
“Don’t touch those levers, you fool!”
Meigs jerked his hand back involuntarily, then waved it defiantly at the
panel. “I’ll touch anything I please! Don’t you tell me what to do!”
“Get away from that panel! Get out of here! This is mine! Do you
understand? It’s my property!”
“Property? Huh!” Meigs gave a brief bark that was a chuckle.
“I invented it! I created it! I made it possible!”
“You did? Well, many thanks, Doc. Many thanks, but we don’t need you
any longer. We’ve got our own mechanics.”
“Have you any idea what I had to know in order to make it possible? You
couldn’t think of a single tube of it! Not a single bolt!”
Meigs shrugged. “Maybe not.”
“Then how dare you think that you can own it? How dare you come
here? What claim do you have to it?”
Meigs patted his holster. “This.”
“Listen, you drunken lout!” cried Dr. Stadler. “Do you know what you’re
playing with?”
“Don’t you talk to me like that, you old fool! Who are you to talk to me
like that? I can break your neck with my bare hands! Don’t you know who I
am?”
“You’re a scared thug way out of his depth!”
“Oh, I am, am I? I’m the Boss! I’m the Boss and I’m not going to be
stopped by an old scarecrow like you! Get out of here!”
They stood staring at each other for a moment, by the panel of the
Xylophone, both cornered by terror. The unadmitted root of Dr. Stadler’s
terror was his frantic struggle not to acknowledge that he was looking at his
final product, that this was his spiritual son. Cuffy Meigs’ terror had wider
roots, it embraced all of existence; he had lived in chronic terror all his life,
but now he was struggling not to acknowledge what it was that he had
dreaded: in the moment of his triumph, when he expected to be safe, that
mysterious, occult breed—the intellectual—was refusing to fear him and
defying his power.
“Get out of here!” snarled Cuffy Meigs. “I’ll call my men! I’ll have you
shot!”
“Get out of here, you lousy, brainless, swaggering moron!” snarled Dr.
Stadler. “Do you think I’ll let you cash in on my life? Do you think it’s for
you that I . . . that I sold—” He did not finish. “Stop touching those levers,
God damn you!”
“Don’t you give me orders! I don’t need you to tell me what to do!
You’re not going to scare me with your classy mumbo-jumbo! I’ll do as I
please! What did I fight for, if I can’t do as I please?” He chuckled and
reached for a lever.
“Hey, Cuffy, take it easy!” yelled some figure in the back of the room,
darting forward.
“Stand back!” roared Cuffy Meigs. “Stand back, all of you! Scared, am I?
I’ll show you who’s boss!”
Dr. Stadler leaped to stop him—but Meigs shoved him aside with one
arm, gave a gulp of laughter at the sight of Stadler falling to the floor, and,
with the other arm, yanked a lever of the Xylophone.
The crash of sound—the screeching crash of ripped metal and of
pressures colliding on conflicting circuits, the sound of a monster turning
upon itself—was heard only inside the structure. No sound was heard
outside. Outside, the structure merely rose into the air, suddenly and
silently, cracked open into a few large pieces, shot some hissing streaks of
blue light to the sky and came down as a pile of rubble. Within the circle of
a radius of a hundred miles, enclosing parts of four states, telegraph poles
fell like matchsticks, farmhouses collapsed into chips, city buildings went
down as if slashed and minced by a single second’s blow, with no time for a
sound to be heard by the twisted bodies of the victims—and, on the circle’s
periphery, halfway across the Mississippi, the engine and the first six cars
of a passenger train flew as a shower of metal into the water of the river,
along with the western spans of the Taggart Bridge, cut in half.
On the site of what had once been Project X, nothing remained alive
among the ruins—except, for some endless minutes longer, a huddle of torn
flesh and screaming pain that had once been a great mind.
There was a sense of weightless freedom—thought Dagny—in the
feeling that a telephone booth was her only immediate, absolute goal, with
no concern for any of the goals of the passers-by in the streets around her. It
did not make her feel estranged from the city: it made her feel, for the first
time, that she owned the city and that she loved it, that she had never loved
it before as she did in this moment, with so personal, solemn and confident
a sense of possession. The night was still and clear; she looked at the sky; as
her feeling was more solemn than joyous, but held the sense of a future joy
—so the air was more windless than warm, but held the hint of a distant
spring.
Get the hell out of my way—she thought, not with resentment, but almost
with amusement, with a sense of detachment and deliverance, addressing it
to the passers-by, to the traffic when it impeded her hurried progress, and to
any fear she had known in the past. It was less than an hour ago that she had
heard him utter that sentence, and his voice still seemed to ring in the air of
the streets, merging into a distant hint of laughter.
She had laughed exultantly, in the ballroom of the Wayne-Falkland, when
she had heard him say it; she had laughed, her hand pressed to her mouth,
so that the laughter was only in her eyes—and in his, when he had looked
straight at her and she had known that he heard it. They had looked at each
other for the span of a second, above the heads of the gasping, screaming
crowd—above the crash of the microphones being shattered, though all
stations had been instantly cut off—above the bursts of breaking glass on
falling tables, as some people were stampeding to the doors.
Then she had heard Mr. Thompson cry, waving his arm at Galt, “Take
him back to his room, but guard him with your lives!”—and the crowd had
parted as three men led him out. Mr. Thompson seemed to collapse for a
moment, dropping his forehead on his arm, but he rallied, jumped to his
feet, waved vaguely at his henchmen to follow and rushed out, through a
private side exit. No one addressed or instructed the guests: some were
running blindly to escape, others sat still, not daring to move. The ballroom
was like a ship without a captain. She cut through the crowd and followed
the clique. No one tried to stop her.
She found them huddled in a small private study: Mr. Thompson was
slumped in an armchair, clutching his head with both hands, Wesley Mouch
was moaning, Eugene Lawson was sobbing with the sound of a nasty
child’s rage, Jim was watching the others with an oddly expectant intensity.
“I told you so!” Dr. Ferris was shouting. “I told you so, didn’t I? That’s
where you get with your ‘peaceful persuasion’!”
She remained standing by the door. They seemed to notice her presence,
but they did not seem to care.
“I resign!” yelled Chick Morrison. “I resign! I’m through! I don’t know
what to say to the country! I can’t think! I won’t try! It’s no use! I couldn’t
help it! You’re not going to blame me! I’ve resigned!” He waved his arms
in some shapeless gesture of futility or farewell, and ran out of the room.
“He has a hide-out all stocked for himself in Tennessee,” said Tinky
Holloway reflectively, as if he, too, had taken a similar precaution and were
now wondering whether the time had come.
“He won’t keep it for long, if he gets there at all,” said Mouch. “With the
gangs of raiders and the state of transportation—” He spread his hands and
did not finish.
She knew what thoughts were filling the pause; she knew that no matter
what private escapes these men had once provided for themselves, they
were now grasping the fact that all of them were trapped.
She observed that there was no terror in their faces; she saw hints of it,
but it looked like a perfunctory terror. Their expressions ranged from blank
apathy to the relieved look of cheats who had believed that the game could
end no other way and were making no effort to contest it or regret it—to the
petulant blindness of Lawson, who refused to be conscious of anything—to
the peculiar intensity of Jim, whose face suggested a secret smile.
“Well? Well?” Dr. Ferris was asking impatiently, with the crackling
energy of a man who feels at home in a world of hysteria. “What are you
now going to do with him? Argue? Debate? Make speeches?”
No one answered.
“He . . . has . . . to . . . save . . . us,” said Mouch slowly, as if straining the
last of his mind into blankness and delivering an ultimatum to reality. “He
has to . . . take over . . . and save the system.”
“Why don’t you write him a love letter about it?” said Ferris.
“We’ve got to . . . make him . . . take over . . . We’ve got to force him to
rule,” said Mouch in the tone of a sleepwalker.
“Now,” said Ferris, suddenly dropping his voice, “do you see what a
valuable establishment the State Science Institute really is?”
Mouch did not answer him, but she observed that they all seemed to
know what he meant.
“You objected to that private research project of mine as ‘impractical, ’ ”
said Ferris softly. “But what did I tell you?”
Mouch did not answer; he was cracking his knuckles.
“This is no time for squeamishness,” James Taggart spoke up with
unexpected vigor, but his voice, too, was oddly low. “We don’t have to be
sissies about it.”
“It seems to me . . .” said Mouch dully, “that . . . that the end justifies the
means . . .”
“It’s too late for any scruples or any principles,” said Ferris. “Only direct
action can work now.”
No one answered; they were acting as if they wished that their pauses,
not their words, would state what they were discussing.
“It won’t work,” said Tinky Holloway. “He won’t give in.”
“That’s what you think!” said Ferris, and chuckled. “You haven’t seen
our experimental model in action. Last month, we got three confessions in
three unsolved murder cases.”
“If . . .” started Mr. Thompson, and his voice cracked suddenly into a
moan, “if he dies, we all perish!”
“Don’t worry,” said Ferris. “He won’t. The Ferris Persuader is safely
calculated against that possibility.”
Mr. Thompson did not answer.
“It seems to me . . . that we have no other choice . . .” said Mouch; it was
almost a whisper.
They remained silent; Mr. Thompson was struggling not to see that they
were all looking at him. Then he cried suddenly, “Oh, do anything you
want! I couldn’t help it! Do anything you want!”
Dr. Ferris turned to Lawson. “Gene,” he said tensely, still whispering,
“run to the radio-control office. Order all stations to stand by. Tell them that
I’ll have Mr. Galt on the air within three hours.”
Lawson leaped to his feet, with a sudden, mirthful grin, and ran out of the
room.
She knew. She knew what they intended doing and what it was within
them that made it possible. They did not think that this would succeed.
They did not think that Galt would give in; they did not want him to give in.
They did not think that anything could save them now; they did not want to
be saved. Moved by the panic of their nameless emotions, they had fought
against reality all their lives—and now they had reached a moment when at
last they felt at home. They did not have to know why they felt it, they who
had chosen never to know what they felt—they merely experienced a sense
of recognition, since this was what they had been seeking, this was the kind
of reality that had been implied in all of their feelings, their actions, their
desires, their choices, their dreams. This was the nature and the method of
the rebellion against existence and of the undefined quest for an unnamed
Nirvana. They did not want to live; they wanted him to die.
The horror she felt was only a brief stab, like the wrench of a switching
perspective: she grasped that the objects she had thought to be human were
not. She was left with a sense of clarity, of a final answer and of the need to
act. He was in danger; there was no time and no room in her consciousness
to waste emotion on the actions of the subhuman.
“We must make sure,” Wesley Mouch was whispering, “that nobody ever
learns about it . . .”
“Nobody will,” said Ferris; their voices had the cautious drone of
conspirators. “It’s a secret, separate unit on the Institute grounds . . . Sound-
proofed and safely distant from the rest . . . Only a very few of our staff
have ever entered it. . . .”
“If we were to fly—” said Mouch, and stopped abruptly, as if he had
caught some warning in Ferris’ face.
She saw Ferris’ eyes move to her, as if he had suddenly remembered her
presence. She held his glance, letting him see the untroubled indifference of
hers, as if she had neither cared nor understood. Then, as if merely grasping
the signal of a private discussion, she turned slowly, with the suggestion of
a shrug, and left the room. She knew that they were now past the stage of
worrying about her.
She walked with the same unhurried indifference through the halls and
through the exit of the hotel. But a block away, when she had turned a
corner, her head flew up and the folds of her evening gown slammed like a
sail against her legs with the sudden violence of the speed of her steps.
And now, as she rushed through the darkness, thinking only of finding a
telephone booth, she felt a new sensation rising irresistibly within her, past
the immediate tension of danger and concern: it was the sense of freedom of
a world that had never had to be obstructed.
She saw the wedge of light on the sidewalk, that came from the window
of a bar. No one gave her a second glance, as she crossed the half-deserted
room: the few customers were still waiting and whispering tensely in front
of the crackling blue void of an empty television screen.
Standing in the tight space of the telephone booth, as in the cabin of a
ship about to take off for a different planet, she dialed the number OR 6-
5693.
The voice that answered at once was Francisco’s. “Hello?”
“Francisco?”
“Hello, Dagny. I was expecting you to call.”
“Did you hear the broadcast?”
“I did.”
“They are now planning to force him to give in.” She kept her voice to
the tone of a factual report. “They intend to torture him. They have some
machine called the Ferris Persuader, in an isolated unit on the grounds of
the State Science Institute. It’s in New Hampshire. They mentioned flying.
They mentioned that they would have him on the radio within three hours.”
“I see. Are you calling from a public phone booth?”
“Yes.”
“You’re still in evening clothes, aren’t you?”
“Yes.”
“Now listen carefully. Go home, change your clothes, pack a few things
you’ll need, take your jewelry and any valuables that you can carry, take
some warm clothing. We won’t have time to do it later. Meet me in forty
minutes, on the northwest corner, two blocks east of the main entrance of
the Taggart Terminal.”
“Right.”
“So long, Slug.”
“So long, Frisco.”
She was in the bedroom of her apartment, in less than five minutes,
tearing off her evening gown. She left it lying in the middle of the floor, like
the discarded uniform of an army she was not serving any longer. She put
on a dark blue suit and—remembering Galt’s words—a white, high-collared
sweater. She packed a suitcase and a bag with a strap that she could carry
swung over her shoulder. She put her jewelry in a corner of the bag,
including the bracelet of Rearden Metal she had earned in the outside
world, and the five-dollar gold piece she had earned in the valley.
It was easy to leave the apartment and to lock the door, even though she
knew she would probably never open it again. It seemed harder, for a
moment, when she came to her office. No one had seen her come in; the
anteroom of her office was empty; the great Taggart Building seemed
unusually quiet. She stood looking for a moment at this room and at all the
years it had contained. Then she smiled—no, it was not too hard, she
thought; she opened her safe and took the documents she had come here to
get. There was nothing else that she wanted to take from her office—except
the picture of Nathaniel Taggart and the map of Taggart Transcontinental.
She broke the two frames, folded the picture and the map, and slipped them
into her suitcase.
She was locking the suitcase, when she heard the sound of hurrying
steps. The door flew open and the chief engineer rushed in; he was shaking;
his face was distorted.
“Miss Taggart!” he cried. “Oh, thank God, Miss Taggart, you’re here!
We’ve been calling for you all over!”
She did not answer; she looked at him inquiringly.
“Miss Taggart, have you heard?”
“What?”
“Then you haven’t! Oh God, Miss Taggart, it’s . . . I can’t believe it, I
still can’t believe it, but . . . Oh God, what are we going to do? The . . . the
Taggart Bridge is gone!”
She stared at him, unable to move.
“It’s gone! Blown up! Blown up, apparently, in one second! Nobody
knows for certain what happened—but it looks like . . . they think that
something went wrong at Project X and . . . it looks like those sound rays,
Miss Taggart! We can’t get through to any point within a radius of a
hundred miles! It’s not possible, it can’t be possible, but it looks as if
everything in that circle has been wiped out! . . . We can’t get any answers!
Nobody can get an answer—the newspapers, the radio stations, the police!
We’re still checking, but the stories that are coming from the rim of that
circle are—” He shuddered. “Only one thing is certain: the bridge is gone!
Miss Taggart! We don’t know what to do!”
She leaped to her desk and seized the telephone receiver. Her hand
stopped in mid-air. Then, slowly, twistedly, with the greatest effort ever
demanded of her, she began to move her arm down to place the receiver
back. It seemed to her that it took a long time, as if her arm had to move
against some atmospheric pressure that no human body could combat—and
in the span of these few brief moments, in the stillness of a blinding pain,
she knew what Francisco had felt, that night, twelve years ago—and what a
boy of twenty-six had felt when he had looked at his motor for the last time.
“Miss Taggart!” cried the chief engineer. “We don’t know what to do!’
The receiver clicked softly back into its cradle. “I don’t, either,” she
answered.
In a moment, she knew it was over: She heard her voice telling the man
to check further and report to her later—and she waited for the sound of his
steps to vanish in the echoing silence of the hall.
Crossing the concourse of the Terminal for the last time, she glanced at
the statue of Nathaniel Taggart—and remembered a promise she had made.
It would be only a symbol now, she thought, but it would be the kind of
farewell that Nathaniel Taggart deserved. She had no other writing
instrument, so she took the lipstick from her bag and, smiling up at the
marble face of the man who would have understood, she drew a large sign
of the dollar on the pedestal under his feet.
She was first to reach the corner, two blocks east of the Terminal
entrance. As she waited, she observed the first trickles of the panic that was
soon to engulf the city: there were automobiles driving too fast, some of
them loaded with household effects, there were too many police cars
speeding by, and too many sirens bursting in the distance. The news of the
destruction of the Bridge was apparently spreading through the city; they
would know that the city was doomed and they would start a stampede to
escape—but they had no place to go, and it was not her concern any longer.
She saw Francisco’s figure approaching from some distance away; she
recognized the swiftness of his walk, before she could distinguish the face
under the cap pulled low over his eyes. She caught the moment when he
saw her, as he came closer. He waved his arm, with a smile of greeting.
Some conscious stress in the sweep of his arm made it the gesture of a
d’Anconia, welcoming the arrival of a long-awaited traveler at the gates of
his own domain.
When he approached, she stood solemnly straight and, looking at his face
and at the buildings of the greatest city in the world, as at the kind of
witnesses she wanted, she said slowly, her voice confident and steady:
“I swear—by my life and my love of it—that I will never live for the
sake of another man, nor ask another man to live for mine.”
He inclined his head, as if in sign of admittance. His smile was now a
salute.
Then he took her suitcase with one hand, her arm with the other, and said,
“Come on.”
The unit known as “Project F”—in honor of its originator, Dr. Ferris—
was a small structure of reinforced concrete, low on the slope of the hill that
supported the State Science Institute on a higher, more public level. Only
the small gray patch of the unit’s roof could be seen from the Institute’s
windows, hidden in a jungle of ancient trees; it looked no bigger than the
cover of a manhole.
The unit consisted of two stories in the shape of a small cube placed
asymmetrically on top of a larger one. The first story had no windows, only
a door studded with iron spikes; the second story had but one window, as if
in reluctant concession to daylight, like a face with a single eye. The men
on the staff of the Institute felt no curiosity about that structure and avoided
the paths that led down to its door; nobody had ever suggested it, but they
had the impression that the structure housed a project devoted to
experiments with the germs of deadly diseases.
The two floors were occupied by laboratories that contained a great many
cages with guinea pigs, dogs and rats. But the heart and meaning of the
structure was a room in its cellar, deep under the ground; the room had been
incompetently lined with the porous sheets of sound-proofing material; the
sheets had begun to crack and the naked rock of a cave showed through.
The unit was always protected by a squad of four special guards. Tonight,
the squad had been augmented to sixteen, summoned for emergency duty
by a long-distance telephone call from New York. The guards, as well as all
other employees of “Project F,” had been carefully chosen on the basis of a
single qualification: an unlimited capacity for obedience.
The sixteen were stationed for the night outside the structure and in the
deserted laboratories above the ground, where they remained uncritically on
duty, with no curiosity about anything that might be taking place below.
In the cellar room, under the ground, Dr. Ferris, Wesley Mouch and
James Taggart sat in armchairs lined up against one wall. A machine that
looked like a small cabinet of irregular shape stood in a corner across from
them. Its face bore rows of glass dials, each dial marked by a segment of
red, a square screen that looked like an amplifier, rows of numbers, rows of
wooden knobs and plastic buttons, a single lever controlling a switch at one
side and a single red glass button at the other. The face of the machine
seemed to have more expression than the face of the mechanic in charge of
it; he was a husky young man in a sweat-stained shirt with sleeves rolled
above the elbows; his pale blue eyes were glazed by an enormously
conscientious concentration on his task; he moved his lips once in a while,
as if reciting a memorized lesson.
A short wire led from the machine to an electric storage battery behind it.
Long coils of wire, like the twisted arms of an octopus, stretched forward
across the stone floor, from the machine to a leather mattress spread under a
cone of violent light. John Galt lay strapped to the mattress. He was naked;
the small metal disks of electrodes at the ends of the wires were attached to
his wrists, his shoulders, his hips and his ankles; a device resembling a
stethoscope was attached to his chest and connected to the amplifier.
“Get this straight,” said Dr. Ferris, addressing him for the first time. “We
want you to take full power over the economy of the country. We want you
to become a dictator. We want you to rule. Understand? We want you to
give orders and to figure out the right orders to give. What we want, we
mean to get. Speeches, logic, arguments or passive obedience won’t save
you now. We want ideas—or else. We won’t let you out of here until you
tell us the exact measures you’ll take to save our system. Then we’ll have
you tell it to the country over the radio.” He raised his wrist, displaying a
stop-watch. “I’ll give you thirty seconds to decide whether you want to start
talking right now. If not, then we’ll start. Do you understand?”
Galt was looking straight at them, his face expressionless, as if he
understood too much. He did not answer.
They heard the sound of the stop-watch in the silence, counting off the
seconds, and the sound of Mouch’s choked, irregular breathing as he
gripped the arms of his chair.
Ferris waved a signal to the mechanic at the machine. The mechanic
threw the switch; it lighted the red glass button and set off two sounds: one
was the low, humming drone of an electric generator, the other was a
peculiar beat, as regular as the ticking of a clock, but with an oddly muffled
resonance. It took them a moment to realize that it came from the amplifier
and that they were hearing the beat of Galt’s heart.
“Number three,” said Ferris, raising a finger in signal.
The mechanic pressed a button under one of the dials. A long shudder ran
through Galt’s body; his left arm shook in jerking spasms, convulsed by the
electric current that circled between his wrist and shoulder. His head fell
back, his eyes closed, his lips drawn tight. He made no sound.
When the mechanic lifted his finger off the button, Galt’s arm stopped
shaking. He did not move.
The three men glanced about them with an instant’s look of groping.
Ferris’ eyes were blank, Mouch’s terrified, Taggart’s disappointed. The
sound of the thumping beat went on through the silence.
“Number two,” said Ferris.
It was Galt’s right leg that twisted in convulsions, with the current now
circling between his hips and ankle. His hands gripped the edges of the
mattress. His head jerked once, from side to side, then lay still. The beating
of the heart grew faintly faster.
Mouch was drawing away, pressing against the back of his armchair.
Taggart was sitting on the edge of his, leaning forward.
“Number one, gradual,” said Ferris.
Galt’s torso jerked upward and fell back and twisted in long shudders,
straining against his strapped wrists—as the current was now running from
his one wrist to the other, across his lungs. The mechanic was slowly
turning a knob, increasing the voltage of the current; the needle on the dial
was moving toward the red segment that marked danger. Galt’s breath was
coming in broken, panting sounds out of convulsed lungs.
“Had enough?” snarled Ferris, when the current went off.
Galt did not answer. His lips moved faintly, opening for air. The beat
from the stethoscope was racing. But his breath was falling to an even
rhythm, by a controlled effort at relaxation.
“You’re too easy on him!” yelled Taggart, staring at the naked body on
the mattress.
Galt opened his eyes and glanced at them for a moment. They could tell
nothing, except that his glance was steady and fully conscious. Then he
dropped his head again and lay still, as if he had forgotten them.
His naked body looked strangely out of place in this cellar. They knew it,
though none of them would identify that knowledge. The long lines of his
body, running from his ankles to the flat hips, to the angle of the waist, to
the straight shoulders, looked like a statue of ancient Greece, sharing that
statue’s meaning, but stylized to a longer, lighter, more active form and a
gaunter strength, suggesting more restless an energy—the body, not of a
chariot driver, but of a builder of airplanes. And as the meaning of a statue
of ancient Greece—the statue of man as a god—clashed with the spirit of
this century’s halls, so his body clashed with a cellar devoted to
prehistorical activities. The clash was the greater, because he seemed to
belong with electric wires, with stainless steel, with precision instruments,
with the levers of a control board. Perhaps—this was the thought most
fiercely resisted and most deeply buried at the bottom of his watchers’
sensations, the thought they knew only as a diffused hatred and an
unfocused terror—perhaps it was the absence of such statues from the
modern world that had transformed a generator into an octopus and brought
a body such as his into its tentacles.
“I understand you’re some sort of electrical expert,” said Ferris, and
chuckled. “So are we—don’t you think so?”
Two sounds answered him in the silence: the drone of the generator and
the beating of Galt’s heart.
“The mixed series!” ordered Ferris, waving one finger at the mechanic.
The shocks now came at irregular, unpredictable intervals, one after
another or minutes apart. Only the shuddering convulsions of Galt’s legs,
arms, torso or entire body showed whether the current was racing between
two particular electrodes or through all of them at once. The needles on the
dials kept coming close to the red marks, then receding: the machine was
calculated to inflict the maximum intensity of pain without damaging the
body of the victim.
It was the watchers who found it unbearable to wait through the minutes
of the pauses filled with the sound of the heartbeat: the heart was now
racing in an irregular rhythm. The pauses were calculated to let that beat
slow down, but allow no relief to the victim, who had to wait for a shock at
any moment.
Galt lay relaxed, as if not attempting to fight the pain, but surrendering to
it, not attempting to negate it, but to bear it. When his lips parted for breath
and a sudden jolt slammed them tight again, he did not resist the shaking
rigidity of his body, but he let it vanish the instant the current left him. Only
the skin of his face was pulled tight, and the sealed line of his lips twisted
sidewise once in a while. When a shock raced through his chest, the gold-
copper strands of his hair flew with the jerking of his head, as if waving in a
gust of wind, beating against his face, across his eyes. The watchers
wondered why his hair seemed to be growing darker, until they realized that
it was drenched in sweat.
The terror of hearing one’s own heart struggling as if about to burst at
any moment, had been intended to be felt by the victim. It was the torturers
who were trembling with terror, as they listened to the jagged, broken
rhythm and missed a breath with every missing beat. It sounded now as if
the heart were leaping, beating frantically against its cage of ribs, in agony
and in a desperate anger. The heart was protesting; the man would not. He
lay still, his eyes closed, his hands relaxed, hearing his heart as it fought for
his life.
Wesley Mouch was first to break. “Oh God, Floyd!” he screamed. “Don’t
kill him! Don’t dare kill him! If he dies, we die!”
“He won’t,” snarled Ferris. “He’ll wish he did, but he won’t! The
machine won’t let him! It’s mathematically computed! It’s safe!”
“Oh, isn’t it enough? He’ll obey us now! I’m sure he’ll obey!”
“No! It’s not enough! I don’t want him to obey! I want him to believe! To
accept! To want to accept! We’ve got to have him work for us voluntarily!”
“Go ahead!” cried Taggart. “What are you waiting for? Can’t you make
the current stronger? He hasn’t even screamed yet!”
“What’s the matter with you?” gasped Mouch, catching a glimpse of
Taggart’s face while a current was twisting Galt’s body: Taggart was staring
at it intently, yet his eyes seemed glazed and dead, but around that
inanimate stare the muscles of his face were pulled into an obscene
caricature of enjoyment.
“Had enough?” Ferris kept yelling to Galt. “Are you ready to want what
we want?”
They heard no answer. Galt raised his head once in a while and looked at
them. There were dark rings under his eyes, but the eyes were clear and
conscious.
In mounting panic, the watchers lost their sense of context and language
—and their three voices blended into a progression of indiscriminate
shrieks: “We want you to take over! . . . We want you to rule! . . . We order
you to give orders! . . . We demand that you dictate! . . . We order you to
save us! . . .We order you to think! . . .”
They heard no answer but the beating of the heart on which their own
lives depended.
The current was shooting through Galt’s chest and the beating was
coming in irregular spurts, as if it were racing and stumbling—when
suddenly his body fell still, relaxing: the beating had stopped.
The silence was like a stunning blow, and before they had time to scream,
their horror was topped by another: by the fact that Galt opened his eyes
and raised his head.
Then they realized that the drone of the motor had ceased, too, and that
the red light had gone out on the control panel: the current had stopped; the
generator was dead.
The mechanic was jabbing his finger at the button to no avail. He yanked
the lever of the switch again and again. He kicked the side of the machine.
The red light would not go on; the sound did not return.
“Well?” snapped Ferris. “Well? What’s the matter?”
“The generator’s on the blink,” said the mechanic helplessly.
“What’s the matter with it?”
“I don’t know.”
“Well, find out and fix it!”
The man was not a trained electrician; he had been chosen, not for his
knowledge, but for his uncritical capacity for pushing any buttons; the effort
he needed to learn his task was such that his consciousness could be relied
upon to have no room for anything else. He opened the rear panel of the
machine and stared in bewilderment at the intricate coils: he could find
nothing visibly out of order. He put on his rubber gloves, picked up a pair of
pliers, tightened a few bolts at random, and scratched his head.
“I don’t know,” he said; his voice had a sound of helpless docility. “Who
am I to know?”
The three men were on their feet, crowding behind the machine to stare
at its recalcitrant organs. They were acting merely by reflex: they knew that
they did not know.
“But you’ve got to fix it!” yelled Ferris. “It’s got to work! We’ve got to
have electricity!”
“We must continue!” cried Taggart; he was shaking. “It’s ridiculous! I
won’t have it! I won’t be interrupted! I won’t let him off!” He pointed in the
direction of the mattress.
“Do something!” Ferris was crying to the mechanic. “Don’t just stand
there! Do something! Fix it! I order you to fix it!”
“But I don’t know what’s wrong with it,” said the man, blinking.
“Then find out!”
“How am I to find out?”
“I order you to fix it! Do you hear me? Make it work—or I’ll fire you
and throw you in jail!”
“But I don’t know what’s wrong with it.” The man sighed, bewildered. “I
don’t know what to do.”
“It’s the vibrator that’s out of order,” said a voice behind them; they
whirled around; Galt was struggling for breath, but he was speaking in the
brusque, competent tone of an engineer. “Take it out and pry off the
aluminum cover. You’ll find a pair of contacts fused together. Force them
apart, take a small file and clean up the pitted surfaces. Then replace the
cover, plug it back into the machine—and your generator will work.”
There was a long moment of total silence.
The mechanic was staring at Galt; he was holding Galt’s glance—and
even he was able to recognize the nature of the sparkle in the dark green
eyes: it was a sparkle of contemptuous mockery.
He made a step back. In the incoherent dimness of his consciousness, in
some wordless, shapeless, unintelligible manner, even he suddenly grasped
the meaning of what was occurring in that cellar.
He looked at Galt—he looked at the three men—he looked at the
machine. He shuddered, he dropped his pliers and ran out of the room.
Galt burst out laughing.
The three men were backing slowly away from the machine. They were
struggling not to allow themselves to understand what the mechanic had
understood.
“No!” cried Taggart suddenly, glancing at Galt and leaping forward. “No!
I won’t let him get away with it!” He fell down on his knees, groping
frantically to find the aluminum cylinder of the vibrator. “I’ll fix it! I’ll
work it myself! We’ve got to go on! We’ve got to break him!”
“Take it easy, Jim,” said Ferris uneasily, jerking him up to his feet.
“Hadn’t we . . . hadn’t we better lay off for the night?” said Mouch
pleadingly; he was looking at the door through which the mechanic had
escaped, his glance part-envy, part-terror.
“No!” cried Taggart.
“Jim, hasn’t he had enough? Don’t forget, we have to be careful.”
“No! He hasn’t had enough! He hasn’t even screamed yet!”
“Jim!” cried Mouch suddenly, terrified by something in Taggart’s face.
“We can’t afford to kill him! You know it!”
“I don’t care! I want to break him! I want to hear him scream! I want—”
And then it was Taggart who screamed. It was a long, sudden, piercing
scream, as if at some sudden sight, though his eyes were staring at space
and seemed blankly sightless. The sight he was confronting was within him.
The protective walls of emotion, of evasion, of pretense, of semi-thinking
and pseudo-words, built up by him through all of his years, had crashed in
the span of one moment—the moment when he knew that he wanted Galt to
die, knowing fully that his own death would follow.
He was suddenly seeing the motive that had directed all the actions of his
life. It was not his incommunicable soul or his love for others or his social
duty or any of the fraudulent sounds by which he had maintained his self-
esteem: it was the lust to destroy whatever was living, for the sake of
whatever was not. It was the urge to defy reality by the destruction of every
living value, for the sake of proving to himself that he could exist in
defiance of reality and would never have to be bound by any solid,
immutable facts. A moment ago, he had been able to feel that he hated Galt
above all men, that the hatred was proof of Galt’s evil, which he need
define no further, that he wanted Galt to be destroyed for the sake of his
own survival. Now he knew that he had wanted Galt’s destruction at the
price of his own destruction to follow, he knew that he had never wanted to
survive, he knew that it was Galt’s greatness he had wanted to torture and
destroy—he was seeing it as greatness by his own admission, greatness by
the only standard that existed, whether anyone chose to admit it or not: the
greatness of a man who was master of reality in a manner no other had
equaled. In the moment when he, James Taggart, had found himself facing
the ultimatum: to accept reality or die, it was death his emotions had
chosen, death, rather than surrender to that realm of which Galt was so
radiant a son. In the person of Galt—he knew—he had sought the
destruction of all existence.
It was not by means of words that his knowledge confronted his
consciousness: as all his knowledge had consisted of emotions, so now he
was held by an emotion and a vision that he had no power to dispel. He was
no longer able to summon the fog to conceal the sight of all those blind
alleys he had struggled never to be forced to see: now, at the end of every
alley, he was seeing his hatred of existence—he was seeing the face of
Cherryl Taggart with her joyous eagerness to live and that it was this
particular eagerness he had always wanted to defeat—he was seeing his
face as the face of a killer whom all men should rightfully loathe, who
destroyed values for being values, who killed in order not to discover his
own irredeemable evil.
“No . . .” he moaned, staring at that vision, shaking his head to escape it.
“No . . . No . . .”
“Yes,” said Galt.
He saw Galt’s eyes looking straight at his, as if Galt were seeing the
things he was seeing.
“I told you that on the radio, didn’t I?” said Galt.
This was the stamp James Taggart had dreaded, from which there was no
escape: the stamp and proof of objectivity. “No . . .” he said feebly once
more, but it was no longer the voice of a living consciousness.
He stood for a moment, staring blindly at space, then his legs gave way,
folding limply, and he sat on the floor, still staring, unaware of his action or
surroundings.
“Jim . . . !” called Mouch. There was no answer.
Mouch and Ferris did not ask themselves or wonder what it was that had
happened to Taggart; they knew that they must never attempt to discover it,
under peril of sharing his fate. They knew who it was that had been broken
tonight. They knew that this was the end of James Taggart, whether his
physical body survived or not.
“Let’s . . . let’s get Jim out of here,” said Ferris shakily. “Let’s get him to
a doctor . . . or somewhere . . .”
They pulled Taggart to his feet; he did not resist, he obeyed lethargically,
and he moved his feet when pushed. It was he who had reached the state to
which he had wanted Galt to be reduced. Holding his arms at both sides, his
two friends led him out of the room.
He saved them from the necessity of admitting to themselves that they
wanted to escape Galt’s eyes. Galt was watching them; his glance was too
austerely perceptive.
“We’ll be back,” snapped Ferris to the chief of the guards. “Stay here and
don’t let anyone in. Understand? No one.”
They pushed Taggart into their car, parked by the trees at the entrance.
“We’ll be back,” said Ferris to no one in particular, to the trees and the
darkness of the sky.
For the moment, their only certainty was that they had to escape from
that cellar—the cellar where the living generator was left tied by the side of
the dead one.
OceanofPDF.com